Externally Aided Projects/International Collaboration(EAPIC)
Technical Education Quality Improvement Programme (TEQIP)
Externally Aided Projects/International Collaboration
1. Technical Education Quality Improvement Programme (TEQIP)
2. Asian Institute of Technology (AIT), Bangkok
The Asian Institute of Technology (AIT) was established in 1959 as the SEATO Graduate School of Engineering to meet the advanced technical education need of SEATO Member States. In 1967, SEATO relinquished its control and the institute was renamed Asian Institute of Technology. Soon after, it became an autonomous institute with the management being entrusted to an International Board of Trustees.
The AIT Bangkok is an autonomous international post-graduate institute providing advanced education in engineering, science and allied fields. The AIT Academic year has two terms beginning January and August. The Government of India provides support to the AIT by way of secondment of Indian Faculty for a period of 16 weeks in selected areas of specialization and reimburses Rs. 33.00 lakhs to the seconded faculty every year. In addition, the Government of India also provides funds to AIT to the tune of Rs 3 lakhs for purchase of Indian equipment, books and journals every year.
For more details, click here: www.ait.ac.th
3. Colombo Plan Staff College for Technician Education (CPSC), Manila
The Colombo Plan Staff College for Technician Education (CPSC), Manila was established on December 5, 1973 at the 23rd Consultative Committee Meeting of the Colombo Plan held in Wellington, New Zealand, to assist the member Countries of the Colombo Plan in developing and enhancing their technician education systems. It became operational in 1974 with the Republic of Singapore serving as the first host Government for 12 years. In 1986, CPSC moved to Manila, Philippines.
The Colombo Plan Staff College is a unique organization, being the only regional institution addressing issues related to quality improvement in technician education and training in the Asia - Pacific region. The objective of the staff college is to improve the quality of technician education and training in the Colombo Plan region by meeting the need for technician teacher educators and trainers and senior staff in technician education who can play a more active part in in-service training and staff development programmes.
Besides the Regional programmes, Collaborative Regional Programmes and In-country programmes are also conducted by CPSC, Manila.
For more details, click here: www.cpsctech.org
4. Shastri Indo-Canadian Institute (SICI)
5. United States Educational Foundation in India (USEFI)
6. Commonwealth of Learning

