 
A. GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSMENT AND ACCREDITATION 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
India has one of the largest and diverse education systems, in the world. Privatization, widespread expansion, increased autonomy and introduction of programs in new and emerging areas has improved access to higher education. At the same time it also led to widespread concern on the quality and relevance of the higher education. To address these concerns, the National Policy on Education (NPE, 1986) and the Programme of Action (PoA, 1992) that spelt out strategic plans for the policies, advocated the establishment of an independent National accreditation agency. 
Consequently, the NATIONAL ASSESSMENT AND ACCREDITATION COUNCIL (NAAC) was established in 1994 as an autonomous institution of the University Grants Commission (UGC). The mandate of NAAC as reflected in its vision statement is in making quality assurance an integral part of the functioning of Higher Education Institutions (HEIs).  
 
The NAAC functions through its General Council (GC) and Executive Committee (EC) where educational administrators, policy makers and senior academicians from a cross-section of Indian higher education system are represented. The Chairperson of the UGC is the President of the GC of the NAAC, the Chairperson of the EC is an eminent academician nominated by the President of GC (NAAC). The Director is the academic and administrative head of NAAC, and is the member-secretary of both the GC and the EC. In addition to the statutory bodies that steer its policies and core staff to support its activities, NAAC is advised by the advisory and consultative committees constituted from time to time.  
 
Vision and Mission  The vision of NAAC is: 
To make quality the defining element of higher education in India through a combination of self and external quality evaluation, promotion and sustenance initiatives. 
 
The mission statements of the NAAC aim at translating the NAAC’s vision into action plans and define specific tasks of NAAC engagement and endeavor as given below:    
 
• To arrange for periodic assessment and accreditation of institutions of higher education or units thereof, or specific academic programmes or projects; 
• To stimulate the academic environment for promotion of quality in teaching-learning and research in higher education institutions; 
• To encourage self-evaluation, accountability, autonomy and innovations in higher education; 
• To undertake quality-related research studies, consultancy and training programmes, and 
• To collaborate with other stakeholders of higher education for quality evaluation, promotion and sustenance. 
 
Striving to achieve its goals as guided by its vision and mission statements, NAAC primarily focuses on assessment of the quality of higher education institutions in the country.  The NAAC methodology for Assessment and Accreditation is very much similar to that followed by Quality Assurance (QA) agencies across the world and consists of self-assessment by the institution and external peer assessment by NAAC.  
 
 
II. CORE VALUES  
Throughout the world, Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) function in a dynamic environment.  The need to expand the system of higher education, the impact of technology on the educational delivery, the increasing private participation in higher education and the impact of globalization (including liberal cross-border and transnational educational imperatives), have necessitated marked changes in the Indian higher education system. These changes and the consequent shift in values have been taken into cognizance by NAAC while formulating the core values. Further to ensure external and internal validity and credibility, it is important to ground the QA process within a value framework which is suitable and appropriate to the National context.  
 
 
The accreditation framework of NAAC is thus based on five core values detailed below: 
 
(i) Contributing to National Development 
Most of the HEIs have a remarkable capacity to adapt to changes, and at the same time pursue the goals and objectives that they have set forth for themselves. Contributing to National Development has always been an implicit goal of Indian HEIs. The HEIs have a significant role in human resource development and capacity building of individuals, to cater to the needs of the economy, society and the country as a whole, thereby contributing to the development of the Nation. Serving the cause of social justice, ensuring equity, and increasing access to higher education are a few ways by which HEIs can contribute to the National Development. It is therefore appropriate that the Assessment and Accreditation (A&A) process of the NAAC looks into the ways HEIs have been responding to and contributing towards National Development.  
 
(ii) Fostering Global Competencies among Students 
The spiraling developments at the global level also warrant that the NAAC includes in its scope of assessment, skill development of students, on par with their counterparts elsewhere. With liberalization and globalization of economic activities, the need to develop skilled human resources of a high caliber is imperative. Consequently, the demand for internationally acceptable standards in higher education is evident.  Therefore, the accreditation process of NAAC needs to examine the role of HEIs in preparing the students to achieve core competencies, to face the global requirements successfully. This requires that the HEIs be innovative, creative and entrepreneurial in their approach, to ensure skill development amongst the students. Towards achieving this, HEIs may establish collaborations with industries, network with the neighborhood agencies/bodies and foster a closer relationship between the “world of skilled work” and the “world of competent-learning”.  
 
(iii) Inculcating a Value System among Students 
Although skill development is crucial to the success of students in the job market, skills are of less value in the absence of appropriate value systems. HEIs have to shoulder the responsibility of inculcating the desirable value systems amongst the students. In a country like India, with cultural pluralities and diversities, it is essential that students imbibe the appropriate values commensurate with social, cultural, economic and environmental realities, at the local, national and universal levels. Whatever be the pluralities and diversities that exist in the country, there is ample scope for debate about inculcating the core universal values like truth and righteousness apart from other values emphasised in the various policy documents of the country.  The seeds of values sown in the early stages of education, mostly aimed at cooperation and mutual understanding, have to be reiterated and re-emphasized at the higher educational institutions, through appropriate learning experiences and opportunities. The NAAC assessment therefore examines how these essential and desirable values are being inculcated in the students, by the HEIs. 
 
(iv) Promoting the Use of Technology 
Most of the significant developments that one can observe today can be attributed to the impact of Science and Technology. While the advantages of using modern tools and technological innovations in the day-to-day-life are well recognized, the corresponding changes in the use of new technologies, for teaching – learning and governance of HEIs, leaves much to be desired. Technological advancement and innovations in educational transactions have to be undertaken by all HEIs, to make a visible impact on academic development as well as administration. At a time when our educational institutions are expected to perform as good as their global partners, significant technological innovations have to be adopted. Traditional methods of delivering higher education have become less motivating to the large number of students. To keep pace with the developments in other spheres of human endeavor, HEIs have to enrich the learning experiences of their students by providing them with State- of- the- Art educational technologies. The campus community must be adequately prepared to make use of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) optimally. Conscious effort is also needed to invest in hardware, and to orient the faculty suitably.  
 
In addition to using technology as learning resources, managing the activities of the institution in a technology-enabled way will ensure effective institutional functioning. For example, documentation and data management in the HEIs are areas where the process of assessment by NAAC has made a significant impact. Moving towards electronic data management and having institutional website to provide ready and relevant information to stakeholders, are desirable steps in this direction. In other words, effective use of ICT in HEIs will be able to provide ICT literacy to the campus community, using ICT for resource sharing and networking, as well as adopting ICT-enabled administrative processes. Therefore, NAAC accreditation would look at how the HEIs have put in place their electronic data management systems and electronic resources and their access to internal and external stakeholders particularly the student community. 
 
(v) Quest for Excellence 
Contributing to nation-building and skills development of students, institutions should demonstrate a drive to develop themselves into centre’s of excellence. Excellence in all that they do, will contribute to the overall development of the system of higher education of the country as a whole. This ‘Quest for Excellence’ could start with the assessment or even earlier, by the establishment of the Steering Committee for the preparation of the Self Study Report (SSR) of an institution. Another step in this direction could be the identification of the strengths and weaknesses in the teaching and learning processes as carried out by the institution.  
 
The five core values as outlined above form the foundation for assessment of institutions that volunteer for accreditation by NAAC. In conformity with the goals and mission of the institution, the HEIs may also add to these their own core values.   
 
III. ASSESSMENT AND ACCREDITATION OF HIGHER EDUCATION   
     INSTITUTIONS  
The forces of globalization and liberalization influenced the Indian Higher education in a big way. In a situation where Higher education, similar to the goods and other services has to compete internationally, quality assurance becomes inevitable. Further Indian HEIs operate within a larger framework comprising of several agencies, national contexts and societal expectations and each of these have a unique rendition of the goals. At the functional level, the effectiveness of the HEI is reflected in the extent to which all these layers of goals mutually concur. In such contexts the A&A process is a beginning to bring in uniform quality and position HEIs  in such a way that they address more directly the quality provision and the expressed needs of the stakeholders.  
 
(i) Focus of Assessment   
NAAC assessment lays focus on the institutional developments with reference to three aspects: Quality initiative, Quality sustenance and Quality enhancement. The overall quality assurance framework of NAAC thus focuses on the values and desirable practices of HEIs and incorporates the core elements of quality assurance i.e. internal and external assessment for continuous improvement. The value framework of NAAC starts with its choice of unit of evaluation i.e. the Institution as a whole. The A&A process of NAAC which involves a combination of self evaluation and external peer evaluation implicitly or explicitly is concerned with looking at the developmental aspects of the HEIs in the context of quality.  
 
Self-evaluation is crucial in the process of A&A and has a tremendous contribution in promoting objectivity, self-analysis, reflection and professionalism on the part of HEIs. The self-evaluation proforma of NAAC provided as “manuals for self study” maps out different inputs, processes and outputs and facilitates HEIs to evaluate their strengths, weaknesses and areas for improvement. The self-evaluation process and the subsequent preparation of the Self-Study Report (SSR) to be submitted to NAAC involves the participation of all the stakeholders – management, faculty members, administrative staff, students, parents, employers, community and alumni. While the participation of internal stakeholders i.e. management, staff and students provide credibility and ownership to the activity and could lead to newer initiatives, interaction with the external stakeholders facilitate the development process of the institution and their educational services. Overall it is expected to serve as a catalyst for institutional self-improvement, promote innovation and strengthen the urge to excel.  
 
NAAC’s role in steering assessment does not stop with the coordinating function but extends to the post-accreditation activities especially in facilitating establishment of  strategic quality management systems for ensuring  continuous improvement. One of the major contributions of NAAC towards this is the promotion of Internal Quality Assurance Cell (IQAC) resulting in building a quality culture. The IQACs are not only expected to facilitate the internalization and institutionalization of quality, but also to activate the system and raise the institutional capabilities to higher levels ensuring continuous quality improvement.  
 
(ii) Criteria and Key Aspects for Assessment 
The criteria-based assessment of NAAC forms the backbone of the A&A. The seven criteria represent the core functions and activities of an institution and broadly focus on the issues which have a direct impact on teaching-learning, research, community development and the holistic development of the students. The NAAC has identified the following seven criteria to serve as the basis for assessment of HEIs: 
1. Curricular Aspects 
2. Teaching-Learning and Evaluation 
3. Research, Consultancy and Extension 
4. Infrastructure and Learning Resources 
5. Student Support and Progression 
6. Governance, Leadership and Management 
7. Innovations and Best Practices 
The Criteria-based assessment promotes judgment based on values.  For example the Criterion on “Governance, Leadership and Management” promotes the values such as participation, transparency, team work, systems view, justice, self-reliance and probity in public finance.  
 
The Key Aspects identified under each of the seven criteria reflect the processes and values of the HEI on which assessment is made. The questions under each of the Key Aspects focus in particular on the outcomes, the institutional provisions which contribute to these and their impact on student learning and development.  
      
      The strengths or weaknesses in one area may have an effect on quality in another area. Thus the issues addressed within the Criteria and Key Aspects are closely inter-related and may appear to be overlapping. The criteria and the Key Aspects are not a set of standards or measurement tools by themselves and do not cover everything which happens in every HEI. They are the levers for transformational change and  provide an external point of reference for evaluating the quality of the institution under assessment.  
       
     NAAC uses the same framework across the country. Using the same framework   across the country provides a common language about quality and makes it much easier for everyone to go in one direction and in evidence based policy making.  
 
1. Criterion I - Curricular Aspects: Depending on the responsibilities of various Institutions, this criterion deals with curriculum development and implementation process. The criterion looks into how the curriculum either assigned by a University or marginally supplemented or enriched by an institution, or totally remade, depending on the freedom allowed in curricular design, aligns with the institutional mission. It also considers the practices of an institution in initiating a wide range of programme options and courses that are in tune with the emerging national and global trends and relevant to the local needs. Apart from issues of diversity and academic flexibility, aspects on career orientation, multi-skill development and involvement of stakeholders in curriculum updation, are also gauged under this criterion. The focus of this criterion is captured in the following Key Aspects: 
 
 	KEY ASPECTS 
1.1(U)* Curriculum Design and Development  
     (For Universities and Autonomous Colleges) 
1. 1(A)* Curriculum Planning and Implementation  
       (For Affiliated/Constituent Colleges) 
1.2 Academic flexibility 
1.3 Curriculum Enrichment 
1.4 Feedback System 
* 
(U)- applicable only for Universities and  Autonomous Colleges 
(A)- applicable only for the Affiliated/Constituent Colleges  
 
 
1.1(U) Curriculum Design and Development (This key aspect is applicable only for 
Universities and  Autonomous Colleges) 
Universities and Autonomous colleges play a major role in the Curriculum Design and Development and thus are expected to have processes, systems and structures in place to shoulder this responsibility. Curriculum Design and Development is a complex process involving several steps and experts. It is a process of developing appropriate need-based curricula in consultation with expert groups, based on the feedback from stakeholders, resulting in the development of relevant programmes with flexibility, to suit the professional and personal needs of the students and realization of core values.  
  
The key aspect also considers the good practices of the institution in initiating a range of programme options and courses that are relevant to the local needs and in tune with the emerging national and global trends. 
 
1. 1(A)   Curriculum Planning and Implementation  
         (This key aspect is applicable only for the Affiliated/Constituent Colleges)     
The affiliated/constituent colleges’ curriculum is given by the affiliating University or other regulatory agencies. However, the colleges have to work out details for effectively operationalising the given curricula. The process involves orientation of the teachers who would handle the curriculum and proper planning of the transaction. It also requires an understanding on the various teachinglearning practices and their appropriate use.  
 
Since acquisition of competencies occurs at different paces for different learners it is required that the institutions have specific implementation plans identifying the time to be spent on specific components. In addition if the institution is providing specially designed courses it also has the responsibility to develop appropriate need based curricula in consultation with stakeholders. 
 
1.2 Academic Flexibility  
Academic flexibility refers to freedom in the use of the time-frame of the courses, horizontal mobility, inter-disciplinary options and others facilitated by curricular 

transactions. Supplementary enrichment programmes introduced as an initiative of the college, credit system and choice offered in the curriculum, in terms of programme, curricular transactions and time-frame options are also considered in this key aspect.  
 
1.3 Curriculum Enrichment   
Every academic institution translates the curriculum framework and the specified syllabus by rendering them into practical forms, in which the main focus is on the student attributes and on holistic development of the students so that he/she can display multiple skills and qualities.  For effective transaction of the curriculum it is required it is up-to date. For keeping the curriculum up-to-date and introduce appropriate changes within the given curriculum, several inputs are provided parallelly or sequentially. All these would be possible through introduction and use of quality materials which would enrich the curriculum and provide concrete referents for organizing the curriculum.  
 
1.4 Feedback System 
The process of revision and redesign of curricula is based on recent developments and feedback from the stakeholders. The feedback from all stakeholders in terms of its relevance and appropriateness in catering to the needs of the society/ economy/ environment are also considered in this key aspect.  
 
2. Criterion II - Teaching-Learning and Evaluation: This criterion deals with the efforts of an institution to serve students of different backgrounds and abilities, through effective teaching-learning experiences. Interactive instructional techniques that engage students in higher order ‘thinking’ and investigation, through the use of interviews, focused group discussions, debates, projects, presentations, experiments, practicum, internship and application of ICT resources, are important considerations. It also probes into the adequacy, competence as well as the continuous professional development of the faculty who handle the programmes of study. The efficiency of the techniques used to continuously evaluate the performance of teachers and students is also a major concern of this criterion. The focus of this criterion is captured in the following  Key Aspects: 
 
KEY ASPECTS 
 
2.1 Student Enrolment and Profile  
2.2 Catering to Student Diversity  
2.3 Teaching-Learning Process 
2.4 Teacher Quality 
2.5 Evaluation Process and Reforms 
2.6 Student Performance and Learning Outcomes                                 
 
2.1 Student Enrolment and Profile  
The process of admitting students to the programmes is by a transparent, welladministered mechanism, complying with all the norms of the concerned regulatory/governing agencies including state and central governments. Apart from the compliance to the various regulations the key aspect also considers the institutions efforts in ensuring equity and wide access as reflected from the student profile having representation of student community from different geographical area and socio-economic, cultural and educational backgrounds.  
 
2.2 Catering to Student Diversity   
The programmes and strategies adopted by institutions to satisfy the needs of the students from diverse backgrounds including backward community as well as from different locales. Gender equity and admission opportunity for differentlyabled students are also considered. 
   
2.3 Teaching-Learning Process 
Diversity of Learners in respect of their background, abilities and other personal attributes will influence the extent of their learning. The teaching-learning modalities of the institution are rendered to be relevant for the learner group. The learner-centered education through appropriate methodologies facilitates effective learning. Teachers provide a variety of learning experiences, including individual and collaborative learning. The teachers employ interactive and participatory approach creating a feeling of responsibility in learning and makes learning a process of construction of knowledge.  
 
2.4 Teacher Quality 
‘Teacher quality’ is a composite term to indicate the quality of teachers in terms of qualification of the faculty, teacher characteristics, the adequacy of recruitment procedures, faculty availability, professional development and recognition of teaching abilities. Teachers take initiative to learn and keep abreast of the latest developments, to innovate, continuously seek improvement in their work and strive for individual and institutional excellence.  
 
2.5 Evaluation Process and Reforms 
This Key Aspect looks at issues related to assessment of teaching, learning and evaluative processes and reforms, to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of the system. One of the purposes of evaluation is to provide development-inducing feedback. Further it should also help the teacher to plan appropriate activities for enhancing student performance. The qualitative dimension of evaluation is in its use for enhancing the competence of students. Innovative evaluation process is to gauge the knowledge and skills acquired at various levels of the programmes. 
 
2.6 Student Performance and Learning Outcomes    
Learning outcomes are the specifications of what a student should learn and demonstrate on successful completion of the cource or the programme. It can also be seen as the desired outcome of the learning process in terms of acquisition of the skills and knowledge. They are embedded in the curriculum. Achieving Learning Outcomes needs specific experiences to be provided to the students and evaluation of their attainment. A programme that states Learning Outcomes that are not evaluated or assessed gets neglected in implementation. Hence all the stated Learning Outcomes must be part of the evaluation protocol of the programme. Student assessment provides an indication of the areas where learning has happened and where it has to be improved upon.  
 
3. Criterion III - Research, Consultancy and Extension: This criterion seeks information on the policies, practices and outcomes of the institution, with reference to research, consultancy and extension. It deals with the facilities provided and efforts made by the institution to promote a ‘research culture’. The institution has the responsibility to enable faculty to undertake research projects useful to the society. Serving the community through extension, which is a social responsibility and a core value to be demonstrated by institutions, is also a major aspect of this criterion. The focus of this criterion is captured in the following Key Aspects: 
	 	KEY ASPECTS 
3.1 Promotion of Research  
3.2 Resource Mobilization for Research  3.3 Research Facilities 
            3.4 Research Publications and Awards    
3.5 Consultancy  
      3.6 Extension Activities and Institutional Social Responsibility             3.7 Collaborations  
3.1 Promotion of Research 
The process of promoting research culture among faculty and students is ensured by facilitating participation in research and related activities, providing resources and other facilities 
 
3.2 Resource Mobilization for Research 
The institution provides support in terms of  financial, academic and human resources required and timely administrative decisions to enable faculty to submit project proposals and/approach funding agencies for  mobilizing resources for Research. The institutional support to its faculty for submitting Research projects and securing external funding through flexibility in administrative processes and infrastructure and academic support are crucial for any institution to excel in Research. The faculty are empowered to take up research activities utilizing the existing facilities. The institution encourages its staff to engage in interdisciplinary and interdepartmental research activities and resource sharing.  
 
3.3 Research Facilities 
Required infrastructure in terms of space and equipment and support facilities are available on the campus for undertaking research. The institution collaborates with other agencies/ institutions/research bodies for sharing research facilities and undertaking collaborative research. 
 
3.4 Research Publications and Awards 
Exploration and reflection are crucial for any teacher to be effective in his/her job. Quality research outcome is beneficial for the discipline/ society/ industry/ region and the nation. Sharing of knowledge especially theoretical and practical findings of research, through various media enhances quality of teaching and learning.  
 
3.5 Consultancy 
Activity organized or managed by the Faculty for an external agency for which the expertise and the specific knowledge base of the faculty becomes the major input. The finances generated through consultancy are fairly utilized by the institution. The faculty taking up the consultancy is properly rewarded. 
 	 
3.6 Extension Activities and Institutional Social Responsibility (ISR) 
Learning activities have a visible element for developing sensitivities towards community issues, gender disparities, social inequity etc. and in inculcating values and commitment to society. Mutual benefit from affiliation and interaction with groups or individuals who have an interest in the activities of the institution and the ability to influence the actions, decisions, policies, practices or goals of the organization. Processes and strategies that relevantly sensitize students to the social  issues and contexts.  
 
Sustainable practices of the institution leading to superior performance resulting in successful outcome in terms of generating knowledge which will be useful for the learner as well as the community. 
 
Extension also is the aspect of education, which emphasizes community services. These are often integrated with curricula as extended opportunities, intended to help, serve, reflect and learn. The curriculum-extension interface has an educational value, especially in rural India. 
3.7 Collaborations 
There are formal agreement/ understanding between the institution and other HEIs or agencies for training/student exchange/faculty exchange/ research/resource sharing etc.  
 
4. Criterion IV - Infrastructure and Learning Resources: This criterion seeks to elicit data on the adequacy and optimal use of the facilities available in an institution to maintain the quality of academic and other programmes on the campus. It also requires information on how every constituent of the institution - students, teachers and staff - benefit from these facilities. Expansion of facilities to meet future development is included among other concerns. The focus of this criterion is captured in the following Key Aspects: 
	 	KEY ASPECTS 
4.1 Physical Facilities  
4.2 Library as a Learning Resource 
4.3 IT Infrastructure   
4.4 Maintenance of Campus Facilities 
 
4.1 Physical Facilities 
Adequate infrastructure facilities are key for effective and efficient conduct of the educational programmes.  The growth of the infrastructure thus has to keep pace with the academic developments in the institution. The other supportive facilities on the campus are developed to contribute to the effective ambience for curricular, extra- curricular and administrative activities. 
 
4.2 Library as a Learning Resource 
The library holdings in terms of books, journals and other learning materials and technology-aided learning mechanisms which enable students to acquire information, knowledge and skills required for their study programmes.  
 
 
4.3 IT Infrastructure  
The institution adopts policies and strategies for adequate technology deployment and maintenance. The ICT facilities and other learning resources are adequately available in the institution for academic and administrative purposes. The staff and students have access to technology and information retrieval on current and relevant issues. The institution deploys and employs ICTs for a range of activities.  
 
4.4 Maintenance of Campus Facilities 
The institution has sufficient resources allocated for regular upkeep of the infrastructure. There are effective mechanisms for the upkeep of the infrastructure facilities and promote the optimum use of the same. 
 
5. Criterion V - Student Support and Progression: The highlights of this criterion are the efforts of an institution to provide necessary assistance to students, to acquire meaningful experiences for learning at the campus and to facilitate their holistic development and progression. It also looks into student performance and alumni profiles and the progression of students to higher education and gainful employment. The focus of this criterion is captured in the following Key Aspects: 
	 	KEY ASPECTS 
 
 	5.1 Student Mentoring and Support  
5.2 Student Progression 
5.3 Student Participation and Activities   
 
5.1 Student Mentoring and Support 
Facilitating mechanisms like guidance cell, placement cell, grievance redressal cell and welfare measures to support students. Specially designed inputs are provided to the needy students with learning difficulties. Provision is made for bridge and value added courses in relevant areas. Institution has a well structured, organized guidance and counseling system in place.  
 
 
5.2 Student Progression 
The Institutions’ concern for students’ progression to higher studies and/or to employment is dealt with under this Key Aspect. Identify the reasons for poor attainment and plan and implement remedial measures. Sustainable good practices which effectively support the students facilitate optimal progression. The institutional provisions facilitate vertical movement of students from one level of education to the next higher level or towards gainful employment. 
 
5.3 Student Participation and Activities 
The institution promotes inclusive practices for social justice and better stakeholder relationships. The institution promotes value-based education for inculcating social responsibility and good citizenry amongst its student community.  
 
The institution has the required infrastructure and promotes active participation of the students in social, cultural and leisure activities. Encouraging students’ participation in activities facilitates developing various skills and competencies and foster holistic development. 
 
6. Criterion VI - Governance, Leadership and Management : This criterion helps gather data on the policies and practices of an institution in the matter of planning human resources, recruitment, training, performance appraisal, financial management and the overall role of leadership in institution building. The focus of this criterion is on the following Key Aspects: 
 
	 	KEY ASPECTS 
6.1 Institutional Vision and Leadership 
6.2 Strategy Development and Deployment 
6.3 Faculty Empowerment Strategies 
6.4 Financial Management and Resource Mobilization 
6.5 Internal Quality Assurance System (IQAS) 
 
6.1 Institutional Vision and Leadership 
Effective leadership by setting values and participative decision-making process is key not only to achieve the vision, mission and goals of the institution but also in building the organizational culture. The formal and informal arrangements in the institution to co-ordinate the academic and administrative planning and implementation reflects the institutions efforts in achieving its vision.  
 
6.2 Strategy Development and Deployment 
The leadership provides clear vision and mission to the institution. The functions of the institution and its academic and administrative units are governed by the principles of participation and transparency. Formulation of development objectives, directives and guidelines with specific plans for implementation by aligning the academic and administrative aspects improves the overall quality of the Institutional provisions. 
 
6.3 Faculty Empowerment Strategies 
The process of planning human resources including recruitment, performance appraisal and planning professional development programmes and seeking appropriate feedback, analysis  of  responses and ensure that they form the basis for planning. Efforts are made to upgrade the professional competence of the staff. There are mechanisms evolved for regular performance appraisal of staff. 
 
6.4 Financial Management and Resource Mobilization 
Budgeting and optimum utilization of finance, including mobilization of resources are the issues considered under this key aspect. There are established procedures and processes for planning and allocation of financial resources. The institution has developed strategies for mobilizing resources and ensures transparency in financial management of the institution. The income and expenditure of the institution are subjected to regular internal and external audit. 
 
6.5 Internal Quality Assurance System (IQAS) 
The internal quality assurance systems of HEIs are Self-regulated responsibilities of the higher education institutions, aimed at continuous improvement of quality and achieving academic excellence. The institution has mechanisms for academic auditing. The institution adopts quality management strategies in all academic and administrative aspects. The institution has an IQAC and adopts a participatory approach in managing its provisions.  
 
7. Criterion VII - Innovations and Best Practices: This criterion focuses on the innovative efforts of an institution that help in its academic excellence. An innovative practice could be a pathway created to further the interest of the student and the institution, for internal quality assurance, inclusive practices and stakeholder relationships.   
	 	KEY ASPECTS 
  7.1 Environment Consciousness 
              7.2 Innovations 
              7.3 Best Practices  
7.1 Environment Consciousness 
The institution displays sensitivity to issues like climate change and environmental issues. It adopts environment friendly practices and takes necessary actions such as – energy conservation, rain water harvesting, waste recycling, carbon neutral etc. 
 
7.2 Innovations 
The institution is geared to promote an ambience of creativity innovation and improving quality. 
 
7.3 Best Practices 
Practices of the institution leading to improvement and having visible impact on the quality of the institutional provisions are considered in this Key Aspect.  
 
 
IV. THE ASSESSMENT OUTCOME 
The assessment by NAAC takes a holistic view of all the inputs, processes and outcomes of an institution and thus the HEIs are expected to demonstrate how they achieve the objectives of the core values through the data and information detailed in the self study reports (SSR). The Assessment and Accreditation outcome includes a qualitative and quantitative component. The qualitative part of the outcome is the Peer Team Report (PTR) and the quantitative part includes a Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA), a letter grade and a performance descriptor.  
 
(i) Weightages 
Taking cognizance of the diversity in institutional functioning, HEIs have been grouped under three major categories i.e.  Universities, Autonomous colleges and Affiliated colleges and differential weightages are assigned for each of the seven criteria as detailed in the table below: 
 
Criteria Key Aspects Universities Autonomous Colleges Affiliated Colleges 1. Curricular  
Aspects 
 1.1 *(U)Curriculum 
Design and Development   50 50 NA 1.1. *(A) Curricular 
Planning and 
Implementation NA NA 20 1.2 Academic Flexibility 50 50 30 1.3 Curriculum 
Enrichment   30 30 30 1.4 Feedback System     20 20 20 Total 
 150 150 100 2. TeachingLearning and 
Evaluation 
 2.1 Student Enrolment and Profile 10 30 30 2.2 Catering to Student 
Diversity  20 40 50 2.3 Teaching-Learning 
Process  50 100 100 2.4 Teacher Quality     50 60 80 2.5 Evaluation Process and Reforms    40 30 50 2.6 Student Performance and Learning Outcomes   30 40 40 Total 
 200 300 350 
Criteria Key Aspects Universities Autonomous Colleges Affiliated Colleges 3. Research, 
Consultancy and 
Extension 
 
 3.1 Promotion of 
Research  20 20 20 3.2 Resource Mobilization for  Research  20 20 10 
 3.3 Research  Facilities 30 20 10 3.4 Research Publications and Awards   100 20 20 3.5 Consultancy 20 10 10 3.6 Extension Activities and Institutional Social Responsibility     40 50 60 3.7 Collaboration  20 10 20 Total 
 250 150 150 4.Infrastructu re and 
Learning 
Resources 
 4.1 Physical Facilities  30 30 30 4.2 Library as a Learning 
Resource 20 20 20 4.3 IT Infrastructure   30 30 30 4.4 Maintenance of 
Campus Facilities 20 20 20 Total 
 100 100 100 5. Student 
Support and 
Progression 
 5.1 Student Mentoring and Support  40 40 50 5.2 Student Progression  40 40 30 5.3 Student Participation and Activities  20 20 20 Total 
 100 100 100 6. 
Governance 
Leadership and 
Management 
 
 6.1 Institutional Vision and Leadership 10 10 10 6.2 Strategy Development and Deployment   10 10 10 6.3 Faculty 
Empowerment Strategies   30 
 30 30 6.4 Financial 
Management and 
Resource Mobilization   20 20 20 Criteria Key Aspects Universities Autonomous Colleges Affiliated Colleges 6.5 Internal Quality 
Assurance System   30 30 30 Total 
 100 100 100 7. 
Innovations and Best Practices  
 7.1 Environment 
Consciousness 30 30 30 7.2 Innovations  30 30 30 7.3 Best Practices 40 40 40 Total 
 100 100 100  TOTAL SCORE  1000 1000 1000 * 
(U)- applicable only for Universities and  Autonomous Colleges 
(A)- applicable only for the Affiliated/Constituent Colleges 
 
(ii) Grading System 
The accreditation status of the assessed HEIs is decided using the weightages detailed above. Institutions will be assessed and graded on a four point scale and qualifying institutions accredited and graded on a 3- letter grade as follows: 
 
Range of institutional Cumulative Grade 
Point Average (CGPA) Letter 
Grade Performance Descriptor 3.01-4.00 A  Very Good (Accredited) 2.01-3.00 B Good 
(Accredited) 1.51-2.00 C Satisfactory (Accredited) ? 1.50 D  Unsatisfactory (Not Accredited)  
Institutions which secure a CGPA equal to or less than 1.50 and graded “D” does not qualify for accreditation. Such unqualified institutions will be intimated and notified by the NAAC as “assessed and found not qualified for accreditation”.  
 
(ii) Validity Period of Accreditation  
The accreditation status is valid for five years from the date of approval by the Executive Committee of the NAAC. To continue the status of accreditation the institution has to record its intent for the next cycle accreditation by submitting the LOI six months before the expiry of the accreditation status and the SSR within six months of acceptance of the LOI by NAAC. Institutions that do not adhere to these timelines will lose the accreditation status. 
 
 
V. ELIGIBILITY FOR ASSESSMENT AND ACCREDITATION BY NAAC  
1) The following types of Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) are eligible to apply for the process of Assessment and Accreditation (A&A) of NAAC, if they have a record of offering degree programmes and atleast two batches of students having graduated from them and fulfill the other conditions or are covered by the other provisions, if any, mentioned below: 
a) Universities (Central/State, including Private) and Institutions of National Importance  
• Provided that in case of professional Universities / Institutions of National Importance, their record of atleast two batches of students having graduated. 
• Provided further that the duly established campuses within the country or off-shore campuses, if any, shall be treated as part of the universities / Institutions of National Importance for the A&A process. 
b) Colleges (i.e., colleges/institutions affiliated to or constituent of or  recognized by universities, including autonomous colleges)  
• Provided Teacher Education / Physical Education colleges shall have a standing of atleast three years. 
• However, colleges/institutions offering programmes recognized by Statutory Professional Regulatory Councils concerned as equivalent to a degree programme of a university shall also be eligible for A&A even if such colleges/institutions are not affiliated to a university.  
 
2) Deemed to be Universities declared under Section 3 of the UGC Act are eligible for the A&A process of NAAC, regardless of the number of years of establishment. A deemed university needs to opt for A&A of all its duly approved constituent units, campuses at various locations within the country and off-shore campuses, if any. However, if the deemed university has any unit/campus which is not approved by MHRD/UGC, the deemed university itself shall not be eligible for A&A. 
 
3) Departments of Teacher Education / Physical Education 
Provided that the Departments of Teacher Education / Physical Education, if any, may opt for A&A: 
• if such departments shall have a standing of atleast three years and have a record of atleast two batches of students having graduated from them; and  
• either along with the University / College or after the University / College has already been accredited. 
 
4) Any other HEIs at the discretion of NAAC. 
Note: The NAAC accreditation does not cover distance education units of HEIs. For details on the process and the time schedules please refer NAAC website:  
http://www.naac.gov.in  
 
 
VI. THE ASSESSMENT PROCESS 
NAAC believes that an institution that really understands itself – it’s strengths, it’s weaknesses, it’s potentials and limitations - is likely to be effective in carrying out it’s educational mission and make continuous improvement. Thus the A&A of NAAC includes a self evaluation by the institution that is expected to be done with honest introspection followed by an external Peer evaluation by NAAC. Self evaluation by the institution and an external peer assessment are inevitable for Quality assurance.  
 
 
 
Some of the important stages in A&A of HEIs are given below: 
 
a) On-line submission of Letter of Intent (LoI) and/or application for Institutional Eligibility for Quality Assessment (IEQA) 
All HEIs fulfilling the eligibility criteria (as at section V above) for undergoing A&A are expected to submit a LoI online to NAAC. On scrutiny of the LoI and confirming the fulfillment of the eligibility criteria by NAAC:  
• Affiliated and Constituent colleges need to submit the application for IEQA status on-line. These institutions become eligible for submission of the SSR only after qualifying / acquiring the IEQA status.  
 
• Affiliated/constituent colleges opting for second, third or fourth cycle of A&A, Universities, Autonomous colleges, colleges with Potential for Excellence (CPE) and Professional Institutions (other than Teacher Education and Physical Education)  need not undergo the IEQA stage and once found eligible can go ahead with  submitting  the SSR.                                                                                  
 
b) Preparation of the Self-Study Report (SSR)   
The assessment process aims at providing an opportunity for the institution to measure its effectiveness and efficiency, identify its strengths and weaknesses and take necessary steps for improvement. Thus the most important step in the process of assessment and accreditation is the preparation of the SSR by the institution. While preparing the SSR, institutions should follow the guidelines provided by NAAC and ensure that the SSR contains information on the following: 
- Evidence of contributing to the core values 
- Evidence of building on the strengths identified by the institutions 
- Action taken to rectify the deficiencies noted by the institutions 
- Substantive efforts made by the institution over a period of time, towards quality enhancement 
- Specific future plans of the institution for quality enhancement 
 
The institutional efforts to prepare the SSR will be an intensive but self-rewarding exercise for institutions. To maximise the benefits of such an effort, the self-evaluation must have the total commitment of the governing body, administration and every member of the faculty of the institution.  All the constituents of the institution should not only be kept fully informed but also be as closely involved in the self-study as possible. To achieve the objectives of self-evaluation, the Head of the institution has to play a positive and creative role.  To assist him/her a Steering Committee consisting of 4 to 6 members may be constituted which will co-ordinate the compilation and analysis of data related to the various aspects of the institution and its functions. This committee could be responsible for organizing the information and data and to prepare a comprehensive SSR, to be submitted to the NAAC. As the Steering Committee will have to play an active role in the preparation of the SSR, it should be ensured that the coordinator of the steering committee has considerable communication skills and the ability to organize and direct a complex institutional endeavour.  S/he must be able to motivate others. During the on-site visit of the peer team, the coordinator of the steering committee may also function as the institutional facilitator.  
 
The institution has to prepare the SSR following the structure given below and submit it to NAAC in five copies (in case of Affiliated/Constituent/Autonomous colleges)/in eight copies (in case of Universities) and a digital/electronic version (CD).  
 
Structure of the SSR to be submitted to NAAC:  
A. Preface or cover letter from the Head of the Institution 
B. Executive Summary- The SWOC analysis of the institution  
C. Profile of the Institution 
D. Criteria-wise analytical report –The institution should provide consolidated response for each of the Key Aspects.  It is not expected to respond question wise. The questions are only pointers and the responses should provide a holistic view describing institutional inputs, processes and outcomes covering the Key Aspect. 
E. Inputs from each of the Department in the format provided. However in smaller colleges where there are no specific departments in vogue, the college may use the proforma and provide programme wise details. 
 
A bulky SSR with too many details and descriptions may result in lack of clarity. Such a report would also lack focus and would generate more information gaps than explanations. Even for a large and complex institution, it is possible to restrict the essential documentation to manageable proportions. Put together the Executive Summary, Profile of the Institution and Criteria-wise analytical report of the  SSR should not exceed 200 pages (A4 size pages, both sides printing, MS WORD keeping single line space, 12 of Times New Roman font and one and half inches margin on each side of the page). The departmental inputs could be in addition to the above.  Inclusion of Appendices in the SSR is to be avoided. Appendices may be made available to the Peer Team during the ‘On-site visit’. 
 
c)  Peer Assessment and Final Outcome 
On receipt of the SSR, NAAC undertakes an in-house analysis of the report and looks into its completeness. On ensuring the fulfillment of the various conditions NAAC processes for organizing the peer team visit to the institution. Depending on the size of the institution, the site visit may vary from two to four days. As the ultimate goal and the efforts of NAAC is to facilitate HEIs to excellence the external peers have an important role in evaluating and synthesizing the outcomes on individual Key Aspects within the contextual framework of the HEI and to arrive at an overall assessment. Thus NAAC periodically orients senior educationists and experts in specialized areas of study from across the country and empanels them to undertake the A&A exercise. As the whole exercise is a transparent and partnered activity, while constituting the peer team NAAC consults the institution about any justifiable reservation it may have about any member of the visiting team constituted by NAAC.  
 
Peer Team Visit to the Institution: The peer team constituted by NAAC visits the institution and assesses the quality of its provisions. To validate the self-study report, the team looks for evidences through interactions with the various constituents and stakeholders of the institution, checking documents and visiting the various units of the institution. At the end of the visit, for ensuring accuracy of institutional data / information the team shares the draft Peer Team Report (PTR) with the Head of the Institution. The PTR duly signed by the Head of the institution and the peer team members along with the criterion-wise Grade Point Averages (GPA), the final Institutional Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) and the Institutional Grade, is submitted to NAAC for further processing. 
 
 
Final decision by NAAC: The Executive Committee (EC) of the NAAC will review the peer team report, the criterion-wise Grade Point Averages (Cr.GPA), the final Institutional Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA), the Institutional Grade recommended by the Peer Team and the feedback received from the institution and the Peer team and takes the final decision on the accreditation status and the institutional grade.  The status of accreditation along with the PTR and the institutional grade approved by the EC will be made public by posting them on the website of the NAAC. Institutions which do not attain the accreditation status will be notified accordingly.  
 
VII. MECHANISM FOR INSTITUTIONAL APPEALS 
Provision for Appeals is one of the good practices followed by external Quality Assurance Agencies.   NAAC has also prescribed the mechanism for appeals. An aggrieved institution can make a written representation to the Director, NAAC with the payment of a non-refundable fee of Rs.20, 000/- within one month from the date of receipt of the accreditation certificate from the NAAC. The five-member Appeals Committee constituted for the purpose will consider the appeal and make recommendations for the consideration of Executive Committee (EC) of NAAC. The EC decision is binding on the institutions. For details, refer to the NAAC website: 
www.naac.gov.in  
 
 
VIII. RE-ASSESSMENT 
Institutions, which would like to make an improvement in the accredited status, may volunteer for Re-assessment, after a minimum of one year or before three years of accreditation.  The manual to be followed for re-assessment is the same as that for the Assessment and Accreditation. However, the institution shall make specific responses based on the recommendations made by the peer team in the previous assessment and accreditation report, as well as the specific quality improvements made by the institution during the intervening period. The fee structure and other procedures would be the same as that for initial Assessment and Accreditation with the exception that the Institutions that volunteer for re-assessment will not be eligible for reimbursement of accreditation expenses, as per the “Guidelines of UGC assistance for Assessment and Accreditation”.  
IX. SUBSEQUENT CYCLES OF ACCREDITATION  
The methodology for subsequent cycles of accreditation i.e. second, third, fourth and so on would remain the same. However due consideration would be given to the post-accreditation activities resulting in quality improvement, quality sustenance and quality enhancement. In the SSRs institutions opting for subsequent cycles of accreditation need to highlight the significant quality sustenance and enhancement measures undertaken during the last four years (narrative not exceeding 10 pages). A functional Internal Quality Assurance Cell (IQAC) and timely submission of Annual Quality Assurance Reports (AQARs) are the Minimum Institutional Requirements (MIR) to volunteer for second, third or fourth cycle accreditation.    
 
To volunteer for subsequent cycle of accreditation, institutions should record their intent six months before the expiry of the accreditation status and initiate institutional preparations for submission of SSRs. The institutions which record their intent to volunteer for subsequent cycle of accreditation and submit the SSRs within the stipulated time may continue to use the outcome of the previous cycle of accreditation till the status of next cycle Accreditation is declared by NAAC.  
 
Institutions which fail to express intent for subsequent cycle of accreditation within the stipulated time will lose their accreditation status on completion of the five year validity period. 
 
X. THE FEE STRUCTURE AND OTHER FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS  
 
For seeking IEQA Status  
Affiliated and Constituent Colleges seeking 	Rs. 2,000/- (each time)  assessment and accreditation for the first-time  
 
For assessment and accreditation of Universities  
	Upto four departments  	Rs. 1,00,000/-  
More than four, but upto ten departments  
 Rs. 1,00,000/- + Rs.15,000/- for each additional department  More than ten departments  
 Rs. 1,90,000/- + 
Rs.10,000/- for each                                                   additional department  The accreditation fee will be limited to a maximum amount of Rs. 5,00,000/- per institution.  
 
For assessment and accreditation of General Colleges  
College with multi faculties i.e., Arts and Science 	Rs. 75,000/-  (Commerce will be treated as a part of Arts faculty)  
	College with mono faculty viz., 	Rs. 50,000/-  
Arts/Commerce/Science/Law or any other  
 
For assessment and accreditation of Teacher Education / Physical Education 
Institutions and Departments  
Teacher education institutions / physical education 	Rs. 50,000/-  institutions  
Teacher education department of a general college 	Rs. 25,000/-  conducting Teacher Education / Physical Education 
Programme (s)  
University teaching departments of Teacher Education Rs. 25,000/-  / Physical Education  
 
For the HEIs recognized under 2(f) & 12B of the UGC Act, the expenditure on accreditation would be reimbursed by UGC through the NAAC. For more details refer NAAC 	Website: 	http://www.naac.gov.in/sites/naac.gov.in/files/Revised-UGCGuidelines-HEIs-2009.pdf.  
 Self-Study for Autonomous Colleges 
 
 
	B. Profile of the Autonomous College 	 
 
 
1. Name and address of the College:  
Name:    
 
Address:   
  
City:     
  
Website:      State:  
2. For communication:  
 
Designation  Name 
  Telephone with STD code  Mobile  Fax  Email  Principal  O:  R:    Vice Principal  O:  R:    Steering 
Committee 
Co-ordinator  O:  R:     
 
3. Status of the Autonomous College by management. 
i. Government 
ii. Private iii. Constituent  College of the University 
4. Name of University to which the College is Affiliated 	
 
5. a.  Date of establishment, prior to the grant of ‘Autonomy’   (dd/mm/yyyy) 
b. Date of grant of  ‘Autonomy’ to the College by UGC:  (dd/mm/yyyy) 
 
6. Type of institution:    
 
a. By Gender 
i. For Men              
ii. For Women           iii. Co-education    
 
          b.  By shift                                           
                  i. Regular                  ii. Day                                                  iii. Evening     
                                        	  
c. Source of funding 
i. Government 
 i. Grant-in-aid  
 ii. Self-financing  iii. 	Any other  	(Please specify) 
 
7. Is it a recognized minority institution? 
  Yes 
No 
 If yes specify the minority status (Religious/linguistic/ any other) and provide documentary evidence. 
 
8. a. Details of UGC recognition:   
Under Section Date, Month & Year  
(dd-mm-yyyy) Remarks 
(If any) i.  2 (f)         ii. 12 (B)        (Enclose the Certificate of recognition u/s 2 (f) and 12 (B) of the UGC Act) 
 
b. Details of recognition/approval by statutory/regulatory bodies other than  UGC  
(AICTE,NCTE,MCI,DCI,PCI,RCI etc.) 
Under Section/clause Day, Month and Year  
(dd-mm-yyyy) Validity Programme/ institution Remarks  i.      ii.      iii.      iv.      (Enclose the Certificate of recognition/approval) 
 
9. Has the College been recognized   
a. By UGC as a ‘College with Potential for Excellence’(CPE)?     
	        Yes                  No  	 
     If yes, date of recognition : …………………… (dd/mm/yyyy) 
 
b. For its contributions/performance by any other governmental agency? 
	        Yes    	No  	
	 	If yes, Name of the agency …………………… and  
               Date of recognition: …………………… (dd/mm/yyyy) 
 
 
 
10. Location of the campus and area:   
Location * 	  Campus area in sq. mts or acres  Built  up area in sq. mts.  (* Urban, Semi-urban, Rural, Tribal, Hilly Area, Any others specify) 
 
11. Does the College have the following facilities on the campus (Tick the available facility)? In case the College has an agreement with other agencies in using such facilities provide information on the facilities covered under the agreement.   
• Auditorium/seminar complex  
• Sports facilities 
? play ground 
? swimming pool 
? gymnasium   
• Hostel  
? Boys’ hostels  
? Girls’ hostels  
• Residential facilities  
? for teaching staff 
? for non-teaching staff  
• Cafeteria 
• Health centre –  o First aid facility  o Inpatient facility  o Outpatient facility  o ambulance facility o  emergency care facility   
Health centre staff –  o Qualified doctor       Full time        Part-time  o Qualified Nurse        Full time        Part-time 
• Other facilities   o Bank o ATM 
o post office  o book shops   
• Transport facilities  
? for students  
? for staff 
• Power house 
• Waste management facility 
12. Details of programmes offered by the institution: (Give data for current  academic  year) 
Sl. 
No.  Programme Level Name of the 
Programme/ 
Course 	 Duration  Entry 
Qualification  Medium of instruction Sanctioned/approved Student  intake No. of students admitted  1 	 UG       2 	 PG       3 	 Integrated Masters       4 	 M.Phil.        5 	 Ph.D.        6 	 Integrated Ph.D.       7 	 Certificate        8 	 Diploma        9 	 PG Diploma        10  Any other (please 
Specify)        
13. Does the institution offer self-financed Programmes?   
Yes        No  
	        If yes,  how many?  	
14. Whether new  programmes have been  introduced  during the last five years? 
Yes  No  If yes 
Number          
15. List the departments: ( Do not list facilities like library, Physical Education as departments unless these are teaching departments and offer programmes to students)  
Particulars Number Number of Students Science 
Under Graduate  Post Graduate 
Research centre(s)    Arts  
Under Graduate  
Post Graduate 
                                            Research centre(s)    Commerce 
  Under Graduate  
Post Graduate 
                                            Research centre(s)    Any Other (please specify) 
Under Graduate  
Post Graduate 
                                            Research centre(s)    16. Are there any UG and/or PG programmes offered by the College, which are not covered under Autonomous status of UGC? Give details. 
17. Number of Programmes offered under (Programme means a degree course like BA, MA, BSc, M Sc, BCom 
etc.) 
a. annual system 
b. semester system 
c. trimester system 
18. Number of Programmes with 
a. Choice Based Credit System 
b. Inter/multidisciplinary approach 
c. Any other ( specify) 
19. Unit Cost of Education  
Rs. Rs. (Unit cost = total annual recurring expenditure (actual) divided by total number of students enrolled )            (a) including the salary component  
                   (b) excluding the salary component   
 
20. Does the College have a department of Teacher Education offering NCTE recognized degree programmes in Education? 
 	  Yes  	No  	
 
	 	If yes,  
a. How many years of standing does the department have?  
	 	……… years 
  	 	 
b. NCTE recognition details (if applicable)   
Notification No.: …………………………………… Date: …………………………… (dd/mm/yyyy) 
 
c. Is the department opting for assessment and accreditation separately?  
 	 	 	Yes  	No  
 
21. Does the College have a teaching department of Physical Education offering NCTE recognized degree programmes in Physical Education? 
 	  Yes  	No  	
 
	 	If yes,  
a. How many years of standing does the department have?  
	 	……… years 
  	 	 
b. NCTE recognition details (if applicable)   
Notification No.: …………………………………… Date: …………………………… (dd/mm/yyyy) 
 
c. Is the department opting for assessment and accreditation separately?  
 	 	 	Yes  	No  
22. Whether the College is offering professional programme?  
 	    Yes  	No  	
 If yes, please enclose approval / recognition details issued by the statutory body governing the programme.   
 
23. Has the College been reviewed by any regulatory authority? If so, furnish a copy of the report and action taken there upon.    
24. Number of teaching and non-teaching positions in the College   
Positions 
  Teaching faculty Non- teaching 
staff 
 Technical staff 
 Professor 
 Associate 
Professor  Assistant 
Professor      *M   *F *M *F *M *F *M *F *M *F Sanctioned by the  UGC 
/ 	University 	/ 	State Government  
Recruited  Yet to recruit           Sanctioned by the 
Management/Society or other authorized bodies  
Recruited  
                  Yet to recruit           *M-Male  *F-Female 
 
25. Qualifications of the teaching staff 
Highest qualification Professor Associate Professor Assistant Professor Total Male  	Female Male  	Female Male  	Female  Permanent teachers D.Sc./D.Litt.          Ph.D.          M.Phil.          PG          Temporary teachers Ph.D.         M.Phil.          PG          Part-time teachers Ph.D.          M.Phil.          PG           
 26. Number of Visiting Faculty/ Guest Faculty  engaged by the College.  
 
27. Students enrolled in the College during the current academic year, with the following details:   
Students  UG PG Integrated Masters  M.Phil.  Ph.D.  Integrated Ph.D.  D.Litt. / D.Sc.   Certifi cate   Diplo ma  PG Diploma  M  F M F M F M F M F M F M F M F M F M F From the state where the College is located                      From other states of India                      NRI students                      Foreign students                      Total                              *M-Male  F-Female  
28. Dropout rate in UG and PG (average for the last two batches)  
                                                                                                                     UG                                     	                    PG  
29. Number of working days during the last academic year. 	
 
30. Number of teaching days during the last academic year  
 
31. Is the College registered as a study centre for offering distance education programmes for 
any University?                                         Yes              No 
 	 	  
If yes, provide the  
a. Name of the University  
b. Is it recognized by the Distance Education Council?  
Yes           No 
 	 c. Indicate the number of programmes offered.   
 
32. Provide Teacher-student ratio for each of the programme/course offered 
 
33. Is the College applying for?  
      Accreditation :        Cycle 1    Cycle 2          Cycle 3          Cycle 4         	Re-Assessment:    	
 
34. Date of accreditation* (applicable for Cycle 2, Cycle 3, Cycle 4 and re-assessment only)  
Cycle 1: …………………… (dd/mm/yyyy)  Accreditation outcome/results 
Cycle 2: …………………… (dd/mm/yyyy)  Accreditation outcome/results 
Cycle 3: …………………… (dd/mm/yyyy)  Accreditation outcome/results 
* Kindly enclose copy of accreditation certificate(s) and peer team report(s)    
 
Cycle 1 refers to first accreditation; Cycle 2 and beyond refers to reaccreditation  
 	 	 
35. a. Date of establishment of Internal Quality Assurance Cell (IQAC)  
  ……………………(dd/mm/yyyy) 
b. Dates of submission of Annual Quality Assurance Reports (AQARs).  	            (i)   AQAR for year …………… on ………(dd/mm/yyyy) 
 	 	(ii)   AQAR for year …………… on ……… (dd/mm/yyyy)  	 	(iii)  AQAR for year …………… on ……… (dd/mm/yyyy) 
	 	 	(iv) AQAR for year …………… on……… (dd/mm/yyyy) 
36. Any other relevant data, the College would like to include. (Not exceeding one page)  
	 	
 
 
C. Criteria-Wise Inputs  
 
CRITERION I: CURRICULAR ASPECTS  
	1.1  	Curriculum Design and Development   
1.1.1 How are the institutional vision / mission reflected in the academic programmes of the College? 
1.1.2 Describe the mechanism used in the design and development of the curriculum? Give details on the process. (Need Assessment, Feedback, etc) 
1.1.3   How does the College involve industry, research bodies, and civil society in the curriculum design and development process? How did the College benefit through the involvement of the stakeholders?   
1.1.4     How are the following aspects ensured through curriculum design and development? 
? Employability 
? Innovation  
? Research  
1.1.5    How does College ensure that the curriculum developed address the needs of the society and have relevance to the regional / national developmental needs? 
1.1.6   To what extent does the College use the guidelines of the regulatory bodies for developing or restructuring the curricula? Has the College been instrumental in leading any curricular reform which has created a national impact?   
  
	1.2  	Academic Flexibility 
	1.2.1  	Give details on the following provisions with reference to academic flexibility    
a. Core / Elective options  
b. Enrichment courses  
c. Courses offered in modular form  
d. Credit transfer and accumulation facility  
e. Lateral and vertical mobility within and across programmes and courses  
1.2.2      Have any courses been developed specially targeting international students? If so, how successful have they been? If ‘no’, explain the impediments.    
	1.2.3 	Does the College offer dual degree and twinning programmes? If yes, give details. 
	1.2.4  	Does the College offer self-financing programmes? If yes, list them and indicate if 
policies regarding admission, fee structure, teacher qualification and salary are at par with the aided programmes?   
1.2.5  Has the College adopted the Choice Based Credit System (CBCS)? If yes, how many programmes are covered under the system?  
1.2.6 	What percentage of programmes offered by the College follows:  ? Annual system 
? Semester system 
? Trimester system  
1.2.7 What is the policy of the College to promote inter-disciplinary programmes? Name the programmes and what is the outcome? 
 
	1.3  	Curriculum Enrichment  
	1.3.1 	How often is the curriculum of the College reviewed for making it socially relevant 
and/or job oriented / knowledge intensive and meeting the emerging needs of students and other stakeholders? 
	1.3.2  	How many new programmes at have been introduced UG and PG level during the last 
four years? Mention details. 
? Inter-disciplinary 
? programmes in emerging areas 
1.3.3   What are the strategies adopted for revision of the existing programmes? What 
percentage of courses underwent a major syllabus revision?   
	1.3.4  	What are the value-added courses offered by the College and how does the College 
ensure that all students have access to them?  
1.3.5   Has the College introduced any higher order skill development programmes in consonance with the national requirements as outlined by the National Skills Development Corporation and other agencies? 
  
	1.4  	Feedback System  
	1.4.1 	Does the College have a formal mechanism to obtain feedback from students 
regarding the curriculum and how is it made use of?     
	1.4.2 	Does the College elicit feedback on the curriculum from national and international 
faculty? If yes, specify a few methods adopted to do the same - (conducting webinar, workshop, online forum discussion etc.). Give details of the impact on such feedback.   
1.4.3 Specify the mechanism through which alumni, employers, industry experts and community give feedback on curriculum enrichment and the extent to which it is made use of. 
1.4.4    What are the quality sustenance and quality enhancement measures undertaken by the institution in ensuring effective development of the curricula? 
 
Any additional information regarding Curricular Aspects, which the institution would like to include.     
 
CRITERION II: TEACHING-LEARNING AND EVALUATION 
	2.1  	Student Enrolment and Profile  
	2.1.1  	How does the College ensure publicity and transparency in the admission process?   
	2.1.2   	Explain in detail the process of admission put in place for UG, PG and Ph.D. 
programmes by the College. Explain the criteria for admission (Ex. (i) merit, (ii) merit with entrance test, (iii) merit, entrance test and interview, (iv) common test conducted by state agencies and national agencies (v) others followed by the College?   
2.1.3 Does the College have a mechanism to review its admission process and student profiles annually? If yes, what is the outcome of such an analysis and how has it contributed to the improvement of the process?  
	2.1.4  	What are the strategies adopted to increase / improve access to students belonging to 
the following categories   
? SC/ST 
? OBC 
? Women  
? Different categories of persons with disabilities   
? Economically weaker sections  
? Outstanding achievers in sports and extracurricular activities  
2.1.5    Furnish the number of students admitted in the College in the last four academic 
years.  
 Categories Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Male  Female Male  Female Male  Female Male  Female SC         ST         OBC          General          Others          
	2.1.6  	Has the College conducted any analysis of demand ratio for the various programmes 
offered by the College? If so, indicate significant trends explaining the reasons for increase / decrease.  
Programmes  Number of applications Number of students admitted Demand 
Ratio UG 
1. 2. 3. 
4.    PG 
1. 2. 3. 
4.    Integrated Masters 1. 
2.    M.Phil.  
1. 
2.    Ph.D.  
1. 
2.    Integrated Ph.D. 
1. 
2.    Certificate  1. 2. 
3.    Diploma  
1. 2. 
3.    PG Diploma  
1. 2. 
3.    Any other (please 
Specify)     
2.1.7    Was there an instance of the College discontinuing a programme during last four years? 
If yes, indicate the reasons. 
 
 
	2.2  	Catering to Student Diversity  
	2.2.1 	Does the College organize orientation / induction programme for freshers? If yes, give 
details of the duration of programme, issues covered, experts involved and mechanism for using the feedback in subsequent years.    
2.2.2 Does the College have a mechanism through which the “differential requirements of student population” are analysed after admission and before the commencement of classes? If so, how are the key issues identified and addressed? 
2.2.3 Does the College provide bridge /Remedial /add - on courses? If yes, how are they structured into the time table? Give details of the courses offered, departmentwise/faculty-wise?  
	2.2.4 	Has the College conducted a study on the incremental academic growth of different 
categories of students; - student from disadvantaged sections of society, economically disadvantaged, physically handicapped and slow learners etc.? If yes, give details on how the study has helped the College to improve the performance of these students. 
2.2.5 How does the institution identify and respond to the learning needs of advanced learners? 
2.2.6  How does the institution cater to the needs of differently-abled students and ensure 
adherence to government policies in this regard? 
 
 
	2.3  	Teaching-Learning Process  
	2.3.1  	How does the College plan and organise the teaching, learning and evaluation 
schedules? (Academic calendar, teaching plan and evaluation blue print, etc.)     
2.3.2 Does the College provide course outlines and course schedules prior to the commencement of the academic session? If yes, how is the effectiveness of the process ensured?  
2.3.3 What are the courses, which predominantly follow the lecture method?          Apart from classroom interactions, what are the other methods of learning experiences provided to students? 
	2.3.4 	How is ‘learning’ made more student-centric?  Give a list of participatory learning 
activities adopted by the faculty that contribute to holistic development and improved student learning, besides facilitating  life-long learning and knowledge management. 
	2.3.5 	What is the College policy on inviting experts / people of eminence to provide 
lectures / seminars for students?   
2.3.6 What are the latest technologies and facilities used by the faculty for effective teaching? Ex: Virtual laboratories, e-learning, open educational resources, mobile education, etc. 
2.3.7  Is there a provision for the services of counsellors / mentors/ advisors for each class or group of students for academic, personal and psycho-socio guidance? If yes, give details of the process and the number of students who have benefitted. 
	2.3.8  	Are there any innovative teaching approaches/methods/practices adopted/put to use by 
the faculty during the last four years? If yes, did they improve the learning? What methods were used to evaluate the impact of such practices? What are the efforts made by the institution in giving the faculty due recognition for innovation in teaching? 
	2.3.9 	How does the College create a culture of instilling and nurturing creativity and 
scientific temper among the learners?   
2.3.10   Does the College consider student projects a mandatory part of the learning programme? If so, for how many programmes is it made mandatory?  
? Number of projects executed within the College  
? Names of external institutions associated with the College for student project work   
? Role of the faculty in facilitating such projects     
 2.3.11 What efforts are made to facilitate the faculty in learning / handling computer-aided 
teaching/ learning materials? What are the facilities available in the College for such efforts? 
2.3.12   Does the College have a mechanism for evaluation of teachers by the students / 
alumni? If yes, how is the evaluation used in achieving qualitative improvement in the teaching-learning process? 
2.3.13   Does the institution face any challenges in completing the curriculum within the 
planned time frame and calendar? If yes elaborate on the challenges encountered and the institutional approaches to overcome these.  
2.3.14   How are library resources used to augment the teaching-learning process? 
2.3.15  How does the institution continuously monitor, evaluate and report on the quality of teaching, teaching methods used, classroom environments and the effect on student performance. 
 
	2.4 	Teacher Quality   
2.4.1 What is the faculty strength of the College? How many positions are filled against the sanctioned strength? How many of them are from outside the state?  
2.4.2 How are the members of the faculty selected?  
 
 
 
	2.4.3 	Furnish details of the faculty  
Highest qualification Professor Associate Professor Assistant Professor Total Male  	Female Male  	Female Male  	Female  Permanent teachers D.Sc./D.Litt.          Ph.D.          M.Phil.          PG          Temporary teachers Ph.D.         M.Phil.          PG          Part-time teachers Ph.D.          M.Phil.          PG           
2.4.4 What percentage of the teachers have completed UGC-CSIR-NET, UGC-NET, and SLET exams? In that what percentage of teachers are with PG as highest qualification? 
	2.4.5 	Does the College encourage diversity in its faculty recruitment? Provide the following 
departments-wise details.   
Department   	% of 
faculty who are product of  the same 
College % of faculty from other 
Colleges within the 
State % of faculty from other 
States % of faculty from abroad            
2.4.6  Does the College have the required number of qualified and competent teachers to handle all the courses for all departments? If not, how do you cope with the requirements? How many faculty members were appointed during the last four years?  
	2.4.7  	How many visiting Professors are on the rolls of the College?  
2.4.8  What policies/systems are in place to recharge teachers? (eg: providing research grants, study leave, nomination to national/international conferences/Seminars, inservice training, organizing national/international conferences etc.)  
	2.4.9  	Give the number of faculty who received awards / recognitions for excellence in 
teaching at the state, national and international level during the last four years. 
 
 
2.4.10   Provide the number of faculty who have undergone staff development programmes 
during the last four years. (Add any other programme if necessary) 
Academic Staff Development Programmes Number of faculty Refresher courses  HRD programmes   Orientation programmes  Staff training conducted by the College  Staff 	training 	conducted 	by 	University/other 
Colleges   Summer / winter schools, workshops, etc.   Any other (please Specify)   
2.4.11  What percentage of the faculty have    
? been invited as resource persons in Workshops / Seminars / Conferences organized by external professional agencies  
? participated in external Workshops / Seminars / Conferences recognized by national/ international professional bodies   
? presented papers in Workshops / Seminars / Conferences conducted or recognized by professional agencies   
? teaching experience in other universities / national institutions and others   
? industrial engagement  
? international experience in teaching   
2.4.12  How often does the College organize academic development programmes for its 
faculty, leading to enrichment of  teaching-learning process?  
? Curricular Development 
? Teaching-learning methods  
? Examination reforms 
? Content / knowledge management  
? Any other  (please specify) 
2.4.13 What are the teaching innovations made during the last five years? How are innovations rewarded? 
	2.4.14 	Does the College have a mechanism to encourage  
? Mobility of faculty between institutions for teaching?  
? Faculty exchange programmes with national and international bodies?  
If yes, how have these schemes helped in enriching quality of the faculty?  
 
	2.5  	Evaluation Process and Reforms 
2.5.1 How does the College ensure that all the stakeholders are aware of the evaluation processes that are operative?  
2.5.2  What are the major evaluation reforms initiated by the College and to what extent have they been implemented in the College? Cite a few examples which have positively impacted the evaluation management system? 
2.5.3    What measures have been taken by the institution for continuous evaluation of students 
and ensuring their progress and improved performance?  
2.5.4      What percentage of marks is earmarked for continuous internal assessment? Indicate 
the mechanisms strategized to ensure rigour of the internal assessment process?   
	2.5.5 	Does the College adhere to the declared examination schedules? If not, what measures 
have been taken to address the delay? 
2.5.6    What is the average time taken by the College for declaration of examination results?  Indicate the mode / media adopted by the College for the publication of examination results e.g., website, SMS, email, etc.   
	2.5.7 	Does the college have an integrated examination platform for the following processes?   
? Pre-examination processes – Time table generation, OMR, student list 
generation, invigilators, squads, attendance sheet, online payment gateway, etc.      
? Examination process – Examination material management, logistics. 
? Post examination process – attendance capture, OMR based exam result, auto processing, generic result processing and certification. 
	2.5.8 	 Has the College introduced any reforms in its Ph.D. evaluation process?  
2.5.9  What efforts are made by the College to streamline the operations at the Office of the Controller of Examinations? Mention any significant efforts which have improved process and functioning of the examination division/section? 
2.5.10   What is the mechanism for redressal of grievances with reference to evaluation? 
 
	2.6.  	Student Performance and Learning Outcomes   
2.6.1     Does the College have clearly stated learning outcomes for its programmes? If yes, 
give details on how the students and staff are made aware of these? 
2.6.2    How does the institution monitor and ensure the achievement of learning outcomes?  
2.6.3    How does the institution collect and analyse data on student learning outcomes and use 
it for overcoming barriers of learning? 
	2.6.4 	Give Programme-wise details of the pass percentage and completion rate of students. 
 
Any additional information regarding Teaching, Learning and Evaluation, which the institution would like to include.     
CRITERION III: RESEARCH, CONSULTANCY AND EXTENSION 
	3.1  	Promotion of Research 
3.1.1 Does the College have a research committee to monitor and address the issues of research? If yes, what is its composition? Mention a few recommendations which have been implemented and their impact.   
	3.1.2  	What is the policy of the College to promote research culture in the College? 
3.1.3    List details of prioritised research areas and the areas of expertise available with the College. 
	3.1.4   	What are the proactive mechanisms adopted by the College to facilitate smooth 
implementation of research schemes/projects?  
? advancing funds for sanctioned projects 
? providing seed money 
? autonomy to the principal investigator/coordinator for utilizing overhead charges 
? timely release of grants 
? timely auditing  
? submission of utilization certificate to the funding authorities  
	3.1.5 	How is interdisciplinary research promoted?  
? between/among different departments of the College and  
? collaboration with national/international institutes / industries.  
	3.1.6   	Enumerate the efforts of the College in attracting researchers of eminence to visit the 
campus and interact with teachers and students?  
	3.1.7  	What percentage of faculty have utilized sabbatical leave for research activities? How 
has the provision contributed to the research quality and culture of the College?   
	3.1.8   	Provide details of national and international conferences organized by the College 
highlighting the names of eminent scientists/scholars who participated in these events.   
3.1.9    Details on the College initiative in transferring/advocating the relative findings of research of the College and elsewhere to the students and the community (lab to land). 
3.1.10     Give details on the faculty actively involved in research (Guiding student research, leading research projects, engaged in individual or collaborative research activity etc.) 
 
	3.2 	 Resource Mobilization for Research  
3.2.1   What percentage of the total budget is earmarked for research? Give details of major 
heads of expenditure, financial allocation and actual utilization for last four years.   
3.2.2  	What are the financial provisions made in the College budget for supporting student research projects?  
3.2.3     Is there a provision in the institution to provide seed money to faculty for research? If 
so, what percentage of the faculty has received seed money in the last four years? 
	3.2.4 	Are there any special efforts made by the College to encourage faculty to file for 
patents? If so, provide details of patents filed and enumerate the sanctioned patents.  
	3.2.5  	Provide the following details of ongoing research projects: 
  Year wise Numbe
r  Name of the project Name of the funding 
agency/Indus
try Total grant 
receive d A. College funded Minor projects      Major projects       Along with Industry       B. Other agencies - national and international (specify) Minor projects      Major projects       C. Industry  sponsored      3.2.6     How many departments of the College have been recognized for their research activities by national / international agencies (UGC-SAP, CAS, DST-FIST; DBT, ICSSR, ICHR, ICPR, etc.) and what is the quantum of assistance received?  Mention any two significant outcomes or breakthrough due to such recognition.    
	3.2.7 	List details of completed research projects undertaken by the College faculty in the 
last four years and mention the details of grants received for such projects (funded by Industry/National/International agencies).    
 
	3.3 	Research Facilities   
	3.3.1 	What efforts are made by the College to keep pace with the infrastructure 
requirements to facilitate Research? How and what strategies are evolved to meet the needs of researchers? 
	3.3.2 	Does the College have an information resource centre to cater to the needs of 
researchers? If yes, provide details on the facility. 
	3.3.3  	Does the College provide residential facilities (with computer and internet facilities) 
for research scholars and faculty? 
	3.3.4 	Does the College have a specialized research centre/ workstation to address challenges 
of research programmes? If yes, give details. 
	3.3.5  	Does the College have research facilities (centre, etc.) of regional, national and 
international recognition/repute? Give a brief description of how these facilities are made use of by researchers from other laboratories.   
 
	3.4  	Research Publications and Awards   
	3.4.1 	Highlight the major research achievements of the College through the following: 
? major papers presented in  regional, national and international conferences 
? publication per faculty  
? faculty serving on the editorial boards of national and international journals  
? faculty members on the organisation committees of international conferences, recognized by reputed organizations / societies. 
	3.4.2 	Does the College publish research journal(s)? If yes, indicate the composition of the 
editorial board, publication policies and whether it is listed in international database?    
	3.4.3 	Give details of publications by the faculty:  
? number of papers published in peer reviewed journals (national / international)  
? Monographs 
? Chapters in Books 
? Editing Books  
? Books with ISBN numbers with details of publishers 
? number listed in International Database (For e.g. Web of Science, Scopus, 
Humanities International Complete, Dare Database - International Social Sciences Directory, EBSCO host, etc.) 
? Citation Index – range / average  
? SNIP 
? SJR 
? Impact factor – range / average   
? h-index  
	3.4.4  	Indicate the average number of successful M.Phil. and Ph.D. scholars guided per 
faculty.    
	3.4.5 	What is the stated policy of the College to check malpractices and misconduct in 
research?   
	3.4.6 	Does the College promote interdisciplinary research? If yes, how many inter 
departmental / inter disciplinary research projects have been undertaken and mention the number of departments involved in such an endeavour.   
	3.4.7 	Mention the research awards instituted by the College.  
	3.4.8 	Provide details of  
? research awards received by the faculty   
? recognition received by the faculty from reputed professional bodies and agencies  
3.4.9 State the incentives given to faculty for receiving state, national and international recognitions for research contributions.  
 
	3.5  	Consultancy    
	3.5.1  	What is the stated policy of the College for structured consultancy? List a few 
important consultancy services undertaken by the College.  
	3.5.2 	Does the College have College-industry cell? If yes, what is its scope and range of 
activities? 
3.5.3  What is the mode of publicizing the expertise of the College for consultancy services? Mention the departments from whom consultancy was sought.  
	3.5.4 	How does the College encourage the faculty to utilise the expertise for consultancy 
services?   
	3.5.5  	List the broad areas of consultancy services provided by the College and the revenue 
generated during the last four years. 
 
	3.6  	Extension Activities and Institutional Social Responsibility (ISR)    
3.6.1  How does the College sensitize the faculty and students on Institutional Social Responsibilities? List the social outreach programmes which have created an impact on students’ campus experience.   
3.6.2   	How does the College promote College-neighborhood network and student engagement, contributing to holistic development of students and sustained community development? 
	3.6.3   	How does the College promote the participation of students and faculty in extension 
activities including participation in NSS, NCC, YRC and other National/ International agencies?  
3.6.4    Give details on social surveys, research or extension work (if any) undertaken by the College to ensure social justice and empower the under-privileged and most vulnerable sections of society? 
3.6.5 Give details of awards / recognition received by the College for extension  activities / community development work.   
3.6.6     Reflecting on objectives and expected outcomes of the extension activities organized by the College, comment on how they complement students’ academic learning experience and specify the values and skills inculcated?  
	3.6.7   	How does the College ensure the involvement of the community in its outreach 
activities and contribute to the community development? Detail the initiatives of the College which have encouraged community participation in its activities. 
3.6.8     Does the College have a mechanism to track the students’ involvement in various 
social movements / activities which promote citizenship roles? 
3.6.9     Give details on the constructive relationships (if any) with other institutions in the 
nearby locality in working on various outreach and extension activities. 
3.6.10    Give details of awards received by the institution for extension activities 
and/contributions to the social/community development during the last four years. 
 
	3.7 	Collaboration  
3.7.1   How has the College’s collaboration with other agencies impacted the visibility, identity and diversity of activities on the campus? To what extent has the College benefitted academically and financially because of collaborations?   
	3.7.2 	Mention specific examples of, how these linkages promote   
? Curriculum development 
? Internship, On-the-job training   
? Faculty exchange and development 
? Research, Publication 
? Consultancy, Extension 
? Student placement 
? Any other, please specify 
	3.7.3 	Does the College have MoUs nationally / internationally and with institutions of 
national importance/other universities/ industries/corporate houses etc.? If yes, explain how the MoUs have contributed in enhancing the quality and output of teachinglearning, research and development activities of the College?           
	3.7.4 	Have the College industry interactions resulted in the establishment / creation of 
highly specialized laboratories / facilities?    
  
Any additional information regarding Research, Consultancy and Extension, which the institution would like to include.     
 
CRITERION IV: INFRASTRUCTURE AND LEARNING RESOURCES 
	4.1  	Physical Facilities 
	4.1.1  	How does the College plan and ensure adequate availability of physical infrastructure 
and ensure its optimal utilization? 
4.1.2  Does the College have a policy for creation and enhancement of infrastructure in order to promote a good teaching-learning environment? If yes, mention a few recent initiatives.      
	4.1.3  	Does the College provide all departments with facilities like office room, common 
room, separate rest rooms for women students and staff?   
	4.1.4  	How does the College ensure that the infrastructure facilities meet the requirements of 
students/staff with disabilities? 
	4.1.5  	How does the College cater to the residential requirements of students? Mention     
? Capacity of the hostels and occupancy (to be given separately for men and women) 
? Recreational facilities in hostel/s like gymnasium, yoga center, etc. 
? Broadband connectivity / wi-fi facility in hostel/s.  
	4.1.6 	How does the College cope with the health related support services for its students, 
faculty and non-teaching staff on the campus and beyond?   
	4.1.7 	What special facilities are made available on the campus to promote interest in sports 
and cultural events? 
 
	4.2 	Library as a Learning Resource 
4.2.1 Does the library have an Advisory Committee? Specify the composition of such a committee. What significant initiatives have been implemented by the committee to render the library, student/user friendly? 
	4.2.2 	Provide details of the following:   
? Total area of the library (in Sq. Mts.) 
? Total seating capacity 
? Working hours (on working days, on holidays, before examination days, during examination days, during vacation) 
? Layout of the library (individual reading carrels, lounge area for browsing and relaxed reading, IT zone for accessing e-resources)  
? Access to the premises through prominent display of clearly laid out floor plan; adequate signage; fire alarm; access to differently abled users and mode of access to collection) 
	4.2.3 	Give details on the library holdings  	 	 	 	Total No. 
	a) Print 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
     (Books, back volumes and thesis) b) Non Print (Microfiche, AV) 
c) Electronic (e-books, e-Journals) 
d) Special collection  
     (eg. Text book, Reference books, standards, patents) 
 
 
	4.2.4 	What tools does the library deploy to provide access to the collection?  
? OPAC                                                                       
? Electronic Resource Management package for e-journals 
? Federated searching tools to search articles in multiple databases  
? Library Website                                                               
? In-house/remote access to e-publications                     
	4.2.5 	To what extent is the ICT deployed in the library?  
? Library automation                                            
? Total number of computers for public access         
? Total numbers of printers for public access     
? Internet band width speed     ? 2mbps  ? 10 mbps  ? 1 gb (GB) 
? Institutional Repository   
? Content management system for  e-learning 
? Participation in Resource sharing networks/consortia (like Inflibnet)  
	4.2.6 	Provide details   
? Average number of walk-ins  
? Average number of books issued/returned 
? Ratio of library books to students  enrolled 
? Average number of books added during last three years 
? Average number of login to OPAC 
? Average number of login to e-resources 
? Average number of e-resources downloaded/printed 
? Number of information literacy trainings organized  
	 4.2.7 	Give details of the specialized services provided by the library  
? Manuscripts  
? Reference           
? Reprography 
? ILL (Inter Library Loan Service) 
? Information Deployment and Notification 
? OPAC   
? Internet Access 
? Downloads 
? Printouts 
? Reading list/ Bibliography compilation 
? In-house/remote access to e-resources 
? User Orientation 
? Assistance in searching Databases  
? INFLIBNET/IUC facilities 
	4.2.8 	Provide details on the annual library budget and the amount spent for purchasing new 
books and journals.  
	4.2.9 	Does the library get the feedback from its users? If yes, how is it analysed and used 
for improving the library services.  
4.2.10  List the infrastructural development of the library over the last four years.  
4.2.11 Did the library organize workshop/s for students, teachers, non-teaching staff of the College to facilitate better Library usuage? 
    
	4.3 	IT Infrastructure   
4.3.1  	Does the College have a comprehensive IT policy addressing standards on IT Service Management, Information Security, Network Security, Risk Management and Software Asset Management?    
	4.3.2  	Give details of the College’s computing facilities (hardware and software).  
• Number of systems with configuration 
• Computer-student ratio 
• Dedicated computing facility 
• LAN facility 
• Wifi facility  
• Propriety software / Open source softwares 
• Number of nodes/ computers with internet facility 
• Any other 
	4.3.3 	What are the institutional plans and strategies for deploying and upgrading the IT 
infrastructure and associated facilities? 
4.3.4 Give details on access to online teaching and learning resources and other knowledge, 
and information provided to the staff and students for quality teaching, learning and research.  
4.3.5    Give details on the ICT enabled classrooms/learning spaces available within the College and how they are utilized for enhancing the quality of teaching and learning. 
4.3.6   How are the faculty facilitated to prepare computer aided teaching-learning materials? What are the facilities available in the College or affiliating University for such initiatives?   
	4.3.7   	How are the computers and their accessories maintained? (AMC, etc.) 
	4.3.8  	Does the College avail of the National Knowledge Network connectivity directly or 
through the affiliating University? If so, what are the services availed of?   
	4.3.9 	Provide details on the provision made in the annual budget for update, deployment 
and maintenance of the computers in the College?  
 
	4.4 	Maintenance of Campus Facilities  
	4.4.1 	Does the College have an Estate Office / designated officer for overseeing 
maintenance of buildings, class-rooms and laboratories? If yes, mention a few campus specific initiatives undertaken to improve the physical ambience.  
	4.4.2  	Does the College appoint staff for maintenance and repair? If not, how are the 
infrastructure facilities, services and equipment maintained? Give details.            
 
Any additional information regarding Infrastructure and Learning Resources, which the institution would like to include.     
 
CRITERION V: STUDENT SUPPORT AND PROGRESSION  
	5.1 	Student Mentoring and Support 
	5.1.1 	Does the College have an independent system for student support and mentoring? If 
yes, what are its structural and functional characteristics? 
	5.1.2 	What provisions exist for academic mentoring apart from class room work? 
	5.1.3 	Does the College provide personal enhancement and development schemes for 
students? If yes, describe techniques employed e.g., career counselling, soft skill development, etc. 
5.1.4 Does the College publish its updated prospectus and handbook annually? If yes, what are the activities / information included / provided to students through these documents? Is there a provision for online access?   
5.1.5 Specify the type and number of scholarships / freeships given to students (UG/PG/M.Phil/Ph.D./Diploma/others in tabular form) by the College Management during the last four years. Indicate whether the financial aid was available on time.  
5.1.6 What percentage of students receives financial assistance from state government, central government and other national agencies? (e.g., Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan 
Yojana (KVPY), SN Bose Fellow, etc.)  
	5.1.7 	Does the College have an International Student Cell to cater to the needs of foreign 
students? If so, what measures have been taken to attract foreign students?   
	5.1.8 	What types of support services are available for 
? overseas students 
? physically challenged / differently abled students 
? SC/ST, OBC and economically weaker sections 
? students to participate in various competitions/conferences in India and abroad ? health centre, health insurance etc.  
? skill development (spoken English, computer literacy, etc.,)  
? performance enhancement for slow learners / students who are at risk of failure and dropouts 
? exposure of students to other institutions of higher learning/ corporates/business houses, etc.  
? publication of student magazines  
5.1.9 	Does the College provide guidance / coaching classes for Civil Services, Defense Services, NET/SLET and any other competitive examinations? If yes, what is the outcome?  
5.1.10 Mention the policies of the College for enhancing student participation in sports and 
extracurricular activities through strategies such as  
? additional academic support, flexibility in examinations  
? special dietary requirements, sports uniform and materials  ? any other   
5.1.11 Does the College have an institutionalized mechanism for placement of its students? What services are provided to help students identify job opportunities, prepare themselves for interview, and develop entrepreneurship skills? 
5.1.12 Give the number of students selected during campus interviews by different employers (list the employers and the number of companies who visited the campus annually for the last four years).  
5.1.13 Does the College have a registered Alumni association? If yes, what are its activities 
and contributions to the development of the College?   
5.1.14 Does the College have a student grievance redressal cell?  Give details of the nature of 
grievances reported and how they were redressed.   
5.1.15 Does the College have a cell and mechanism to resolve issues of sexual harassment?   
5.1.16 Is there an anti-ragging committee? How many instances (if any) have been reported 
during the last four years and what action has been taken on these? 
5.1.17   How does the College elicit the cooperation from all stakeholders to  ensure  overall  development  of  the  students  considering  the curricular  and  co - curricular  activities,  research,  community orientation, etc. ?   
	5.1.18 	What special schemes/mechanisms are in place to motivate students for participation 
in extracurricular activities such as sports, cultural events, etc? 
5.1.19  How does the College ensure participation of women in ‘intra’ and ‘inter’ institutional 
sports competitions and cultural activities? Provides details of sports and cultural activities in which such efforts were made? 
 
	5.2  	Student Progression  
5.2.1 Provide details of programme-wise success rate of the College for the last four years. How does the College compare itself with the performance of other autonomous  Colleges / universities (if available)  
5.2.2 Providing the percentage of students progressing to higher education or employment (for the last four batches) highlight the observed trends.  
Student progression % UG to PG  PG to M.Phil.   PG to Ph.D.    Employed  
• Campus selection  
• Other than campus recruitment  	5.2.3 	What is the Programme-wise completion rate/dropout rate within the time span as 
stipulated by the College/University? 
5.2.4 	What is the number and percentage of students who appeared/qualified in examinations like UGC-CSIR-NET, UGC-NET, SLET, ATE / CAT / GRE / TOFEL / GMAT / Central / State services, Defense, Civil Services, etc.  
	5.2.5 	Provide details regarding the number of Ph.D/D.Sc./D.Litt. theses submitted, 
accepted, resubmitted and rejected in the last four years. 
 
	5.3  	Student Participation and Activities  
	5.3.1 	List the range of sports and games, cultural and extracurricular activities available to 
students. Provide details of participation and program calendar. 
	5.3.2 	Provide details of the previous four years regarding the achievements of students in 
co-curricular, extracurricular activities and cultural activities at different levels: University / State / Zonal / National / International, etc. 
	5.3.3 	How often does the College collect feedback from students for improving the support 
services? How is the feedback used? 
5.3.4     Does the College have a mechanism to seek and use data and feedback from its 
graduates and employers, to improve the growth and development of the College? 
5.3.5   	How does the College involve and encourage students to publish   materials like catalogues, wall magazines, College magazine, and other material? List the major publications/ materials brought out by the students during the previous academic session. 
	5.3.6  	Does the College have a Student Council or any similar body? Give details on its 
constitution, major activities and funding.  
	5.3.7 	Give details of various academic and administrative bodies that have student 
representatives on them. Provide details of their activities. 
 
Any additional information regarding Student Support and Progression, which the institution would like to include.     
 
CRITERION VI: GOVERNANCE, LEADERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT     
	6.1  	Institutional Vision and Leadership  
	6.1.1  	State the vision and mission of the College.  
	6.1.2 	Does  the  mission  statement  define  the  College’s distinctive characteristics in terms 
of addressing the needs of   the society, the students  it  seeks  to  serve,  College’s traditions  and  value orientations, vision for the future, etc.?  
	6.1.3   	How is the leadership involved in   
? ensuring the organization’s management system development, implementation and continuous improvement  
? interaction with stakeholders 
? reinforcing culture of excellence 
? identifying needs and championing organizational development (OD)? 
6.1.4     Were any of the senior leadership positions of the College vacant for more than a 
year? If so, indicate the reasons. 
	6.1.5 	Does the College ensure that all positions in its various statutory bodies are filled and 
conduct of meetings at the stipulated intervals?  
6.1.6 	 Does the College promote a culture of participative management? If yes, indicate the levels of participative management. 
6.1.7      Give details of the academic and administrative leadership provided by the University 
to the College? 
6.1.8      How does the College groom the leadership at various levels?      
	6.1.9 	Has the College evolved any strategy for knowledge management?  If yes, give 
details.  
	6.1.10 	How are the following values reflected in various functions of the College? 
? Contributing to national development  
? Fostering global competencies among students  
? Inculcating a value system among students 
? Promoting use of technology 
? Quest for excellence 
6.1.11    Give details of the UGC autonomous review committee’s recommendations and its compliance. 
 
	6.2  	Strategy Development and Deployment  
	6.2.1  	Does the College have a Perspective Plan for development? If so, give the aspects 
considered in development of policy and strategy.  
? Teaching and learning 
? Research and development 
? Community engagement  
? Human resource planning and development  
? Industry interaction  
? Internationalisation 
	6.2.2 	Enunciate the internal organizational structure of the College for decision making 
processes and their effectiveness.   
	6.2.3 	Specify how many planned proposals were initiated/implemented, during the last four 
years. Give details. 
6.2.4     Does the College have a formally stated quality policy? How is it designed, driven, 
deployed and reviewed?     
	6.2.5   	How does the College ensure that grievances / complaints are promptly attended to 
and resolved effectively? Is there a mechanism to analyse the nature of grievances for promoting better stakeholder-relationship?   
	6.2.6 	Does the College have a mechanism for analyzing student feedback on institutional 
performance? If yes, what was the institutional response?    
	6.2.7  	In what way the affiliating University helped the College to identify the 
developmental needs of the College?  
6.2.8  Does the affiliating university have a functional College Development Council (CDC) or Board of College and University Development (BCUD)? If yes, In what way College is benefitted.  
6.2.9    How does the College get feedback from non-teaching, teaching, parents and alumni on 
its functioning and how it is utilized. 
	6.2.10 	Does the College encourage autonomy to its academic departments and how does it 
ensure accountability?  
	6.2.11 	Does the College conduct performance auditing of its various departments? 
 
	6.3  	Faculty Empowerment Strategies   
	6.3.1 	What efforts are made by the College to enhance the professional development of 
teaching and non teaching staff? 
	6.3.2 	What is the outcome of the review of the Performance Appraisal Reports? List the 
major decisions. 
6.3.3    What are the welfare schemes available for teaching and non teaching staff? What 
percentage of staff have availed the benefit of such schemes in the last four years?  
	6.3.4 	What are the measures taken by the College for attracting and retaining eminent 
faculty?   
	6.3.5 	Has the College conducted a gender audit during the last four years? If yes, mention a 
few salient findings.  
	6.3.6 	Does the College conduct any gender sensitization programs for its staff? 
	6.3.7  	What is the impact of the University’s UGC-Academic Staff College Programmes in 
enhancing competencies of the College faculty? 
 
	6.4  	Financial Management and Resource Mobilization  
	6.4.1  	What is the institutional mechanism to monitor effective and efficient use of financial 
resources?  
	6.4.2 	Does the College have a mechanism for internal and external audit? Give details.  
	6.4.3 	Provide audited income and expenditure statement of academic and administrative 
activities of the previous four years.   
6.4.4 Have the accounts been audited regularly? What are the major audit objections and how are they complied with? 
6.4.5      Narrate the efforts taken by the College for resource mobilization.   
6.4.6    Is there any provision for the College to maintain the ‘corpus fund’? If yes, give details. 
 
6.5        Internal Quality Assurance System  
	6.5.1  	Does the College conduct an academic audit of its departments? If yes, give details. 
	6.5.2  	Based on the recommendations of academic audit what specific measures have been 
taken by the College to improve teaching, learning and evaluation?  
	6.5.3   	Is there a central body within the College to continuously review the teaching learning 
process? Give details of its structure, methodologies of operations and outcome?  
	6.5.4 	How has IQAC contributed to institutionalizing quality assurance strategies and 
processes?   
	6.5.5 	Does the IQAC have external members on its committees? If so, mention any 
significant contribution made by such members.      
	6.5.6 	Has the IQAC conducted any study on the incremental academic growth of students 
from disadvantaged sections of society?  
	6.5.7 	What policies are in place for the periodic review of administrative and academic 
departments, subject areas, research centres, etc.? 
 
Any additional information regarding Governance, Leadership and Management, which the institution would like to include.     
 
CRITERIA VII: INNOVATION AND BEST PRACTICES   7.1 	Environment Consciousness 
	7.1.1 	Does the College conduct a Green Audit of its campus?    
	7.1.2  	What are the initiatives taken by the College to make the campus eco-friendly? 
? Energy conservation  
? Use of renewable energy  
? Water harvesting  
? Check dam construction  
? Efforts for Carbon neutrality  
? Plantation  
? Hazardous waste management  
? e-waste management  
? any other  
 
	7.2 	Innovations  
	7.2.1 	Provide details of innovations introduced during the last four years which have 
created a positive impact on the functioning of the College.     
 
	7.3 	Best Practices  
	7.3.1 	Give details of any two best practices which have contributed to better academic and 
administrative functioning of the College.  
 
Format for Presentation of Best Practices 
 
	1. 	Title of the Practice  
         This title should capture the keywords that describe the practice. 
2.       Objectives of the Practice  
        What are the objectives / intended outcomes of this “best practice” and what are the underlying principles or concepts of this practice (in about 100 words)? 
3.       The Context  
       What were the contextual features or challenging issues that needed to be addressed in designing and implementing this practice (in about 150 words)?  
4.       The Practice  
         Describe the practice and its uniqueness in the context of India higher education. 
What were the constraints / limitations, if any, faced (in about 400 words)?  
  5.    Evidence of Success  
        Provide evidence of success such as performance against targets and benchmarks, review results. What do these results indicate?  Describe in about 200 words. 
6.      Problems Encountered and Resources Required  
         Please identify the problems encountered and resources required to implement the practice (in about 150 words). 
7.       Notes  
         Optional. Please add any other information that may be relevant for adopting/ implementing the Best Practice in other institutions (in about 150 words).  
 
Any additional information regarding Innovations and Best Practices, which the College would like to include.     

Evaluative Report of the Department  
 
1. Name of the Department  & its year of establishment 
2. Names of Programmes / Courses offered (UG, PG, M.Phil., Ph.D., Integrated Masters; Integrated Ph.D., etc.)  
3. Interdisciplinary courses and departments involved 
4. Annual/ semester/choice based credit system  
5. Participation of the department in the courses offered by other departments 
6. Number of teaching posts sanctioned and filled (Professors/Associate Professors/Asst. Professors) 
 Sanctioned  Filled Professor    Associate Professors   Asst. Professors    
7. Faculty profile with name, qualification, designation, specialisation (D.Sc./D.Litt./ Ph.D./M.Phil., etc.)  
Name 
 Qualification Designation Specialization No. of 
Years of 
Experience No. of Ph.D. students guided in the last 4 years        
8. Percentage of classes taken by temporary faculty – programme-wise information  
9. Programme-wise Student Teacher Ratio 
10. Number of academic support staff (technical) and administrative staff: sanctioned and 
filled 
11. Number of faculty with ongoing projects from a) national b) international funding agencies and c) Total grants received. Mention names of funding agencies and grants received project-wise.  
12. Departmental projects funded by DST-FIST; DBT, ICSSR, etc.; total grants received  
13. Research facility / centre with  
• state recognition 
• national recognition  
• international recognition  
14. Publications:  
? number of papers published in peer reviewed journals (national / international)  ? Monographs ? Chapter(s) in Books ? Editing Books  ? Books with ISBN numbers with details of publishers ? number listed in International Database (For e.g. Web of Science, Scopus, Humanities International Complete, Dare Database - International Social Sciences Directory, 
EBSCO host, etc.) ? Citation Index – range / average  ? SNIP ? SJR ? Impact factor – range / average   ? h-index  15. Details of patents and income generated   
16. Areas of consultancy and income generated   
17. Faculty recharging strategies 
18. Student projects  
• percentage of students who have done in-house projects including inter-departmental  
• percentage of students doing projects in collaboration with industries / institutes  
19. Awards / recognitions received at the national and international level by  
• Faculty 
• Doctoral / post doctoral fellows  
• Students  
20. Seminars/ Conferences/Workshops organized and the source of funding (national / international) with details of outstanding participants, if any. 
21. Student profile course-wise: 
Name of the Course (refer question no. 2) Applications received Selected Male    Female  Pass percentage  Male     Female                   
22. Diversity of students 
Name of the 
Course 
(refer question no. 2) % of students 
from the 
College % of students from the State % of students from other 
States % of students from 
other countries                       
23. How many students have cleared Civil Services, Defense Services, NET, SLET, GATE and any other competitive examinations?  
24. Student progression 
Student progression Percentage against enrolled  UG to PG  PG to M.Phil.   PG to Ph.D.    Ph.D. to Post-Doctoral    Employed  
• Campus selection  
• Other than campus recruitment   Entrepreneurs      
25. Diversity of staff 
Percentage of  faculty who are graduates    of the same parent university   from other universities within the State  from other universities from other States   
26. Number of faculty who were awarded Ph.D., D.Sc. and D.Litt. during the assessment period.  
27. Present details about infrastructural facilities  
a) Library  
b) Internet facilities for staff and students  
c) Total number of class rooms 
d) Class rooms with ICT facility 
e) Students’ laboratories  
f) Research laboratories  
28. Number of students of the department getting financial assistance from College.  
29. Was any need assessment exercise undertaken before the development of new program(s)? 
If so, give the methodology.   
30. Does the department obtain feedback from  
a. faculty on curriculum as well as teaching-learning-evaluation? If yes, how does the department utilize it?   
b. students on staff, curriculum as well as teaching-learning-evaluation and what is the response of the department to the same? 
c. alumni and employers on the programmes and what is the response of the department to the same? 
31. List the distinguished alumni of the department (maximum 10) 
32. Give details of student enrichment programmes (special lectures /  workshops / seminar) with external experts. 
33. List the teaching methods adopted by the faculty for different programmes.  
34. How does the department ensure that programme objectives are constantly met and learning outcomes monitored?   
35. Highlight the participation of students and faculty in extension activities. 
36. Give details of “beyond syllabus scholarly activities” of the department. 
37. State whether the programme/ department is accredited/ graded by other agencies. Give details.  
38. Detail any five Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Challenges (SWOC) of the department  
39. Future plans of the department.  
 
 
Post-accreditation Initiatives   
 
If the college has already undergone the accreditation process by NAAC, please highlight the significant quality sustenance and enhancement measures undertaken during the last four years. The narrative may not exceed five pages.    
Declaration by the Head of the Institution 
 
 
I certify that that the data included in this Self-Study Report (SSR) are true to the best of my knowledge.  
 
This SSR is prepared by the institution after internal discussions, and no part thereof has been outsourced.  
 
I am aware that the Peer team will validate the information provided in this SSR during the peer team visit.  
 
 
Signature of the Head of the institution                                                                                     with seal:  
 
 
 
Place:  
Date: 
 

Glossary  
 
Academic audit: An exercise which serves to provide assurance that the delegated responsibilities for quality and standards of academic provision are being appropriately discharged. 
 
Academic calendar: The schedule of the institution for the academic year, giving details of all academic and administrative events. 
 
Academic flexibility: Choice offered to the students in the curriculum offering and the curriculum transactions. 
 
Accreditation: Certification of quality that is valid for a fixed period, which in the case of NAAC is five years. 
 
Assessment: Performance evaluation of an institution or its units based on certain established criteria. 
 
Assessors: Trained academics or experts who represent NAAC on peer teams. 
 
# Benchmarks: An example of good performance that serves as a standard for comparison of one’s own performance. It is a technique in which an institution measures its performance against that of the best of others.  
 
Beyond syllabus scholarly activities: Participation in academic activities beyond the minimum requirements of the syllabus. 
 
Blended learning: A mixing of different learning environments such as traditional face-to-face classroom methods with modern computer-mediated activities.   
 
Bridge course: A teaching module which helps to close the gap between two levels of competence. 
 
Carbon neutral: A term used to describe fuels that neither contribute to nor reduce the amount of carbon (measured in the release of carbon dioxide) into the atmosphere. 
 
Catering to student diversity: The strategies adopted by institution to fulfill the needs of a heterogeneous group of students. 
 
Choice based credit system: A mode of learning in higher education which facilitates a student to have some freedom in selecting his/her own choices, across various disciplines for completing a UG / PG programme. It is popularly known as the cafeteria model.  
 
Citation index: The number of times a research papers it is referred to by other researchers in refereed journals and is a measure of validity of its contents. 
 
Co-curricular activities: Activities, which support the curriculum such as field trips, display of academic achievements, quiz, debate, discussion, seminars, role-play, etc. 
 
Collaboration: Formal agreement/ understanding between any two or more institutions for training, research, student/faculty exchange or extension support. 
 
# Completion rates (course/programme): The ratio of the total number of learners successfully completing a course/ graduating from a programme in a given year to the total number of learners who initially enrolled on the course/programme. 
 
Constituencies: All the academic, administrative and support units of the institution. 
 
Counseling: Assisting and mentoring students individually or collectively for academic, career, personal and financial decision-making. 
 
Course outlines: List of the course modules, similar to a table of contents in a book or the outline used for writing papers. The outline defines the scope and content of the course.  
 
Course schedule: Details of classes being offered, its time, location, faculty, and its unique number which students must know in order to register. The course schedule is published prior to the commencement of registration for each semester / session.  
 
Criteria: Pre-determined standards of functioning of an institution of higher education that form the basis of assessment and accreditation as identified / defined by NAAC. 
 
Curriculum design and development: Process of defining the contents of units of study and usually obtained through needs assessment, feedback from stakeholders and expert groups. Curriculum design and curriculum development are procedures which are closely linked to the description of learning outcomes.  
 
Cycles of Accreditation: An institution undergoing the accreditation process by NAAC for the first time is said to be in Cycle 1 and the consecutive five year periods as Cycle 2, 3, etc. 
 
Dare Database - International Social Sciences Directory: Provides access to world wide information on social science, peace, and human rights research and training institutes, social science specialists, and social science periodicals. 
 
Dual degree: Pursuing two different university degrees in parallel, either at the same institution or at different institutions (sometimes in different countries), completing them in less time than it would take to earn them separately.   
 
EBSCOhost: Is an online reference resource with designed to cater to user needs and preferences at every level of research, with over 350 full text and secondary databases available. 
 
Elective courses: A choice available to students to select from among a large number of subjects. 
 
Emerging areas: New areas of study and research deemed important to pursue. These areas may have been identified by national agencies or international bodies.   
 
Enrichment courses: Value added courses offered by institution for student empowerment. They enhance the curriculum by amplifying, supplementing and replacing such parts or features as have become ineffective or obsolete. 
 
Evaluation process and reforms: Assessment of learning, teaching and evaluation process and reforms to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of the system. 
 
Extension activities: The aspect of education, which emphasizes neighborhood services. These are often integrated with curricula as extended opportunities intended to help, serve reflect and learn. The curriculum-extension interface has educational values, especially in rural India. 
Faculty development program: Programs aimed at updating the knowledge and pedagogical skills of faculty. 
 
# Feedback: a) formative and evaluative comments given by tutors on the performance of individual learners.      
b) evaluative comments made by stakeholders to the institution on the quality and effectiveness of a defined process. 
c) response from students, academic peers and employers for review and design of curriculum. 
 
Financial management: Budgeting and optimum utilization of financial resources. 
 
Flexibility: A mechanism through which students have wider choices of programmes to choose from, as well as, multiple entry and exit points for programmes / courses.  
 
Gender Audit: A tool and a process based on a methodology to promote organizational learning at the individual, work unit and organizational levels on how to practically and effectively mainstream gender.  
 
Graduate Attributes: Qualities, skills and understandings a university community agrees its students should develop during their time with the institution. These attributes include, but go beyond, the disciplinary expertise or technical knowledge that has traditionally formed the core of most university courses. They are qualities that also prepare graduates as agents for social good in an unknown future.1  
 
Green Audit: The process of assessing the environmental impact of an organization, process, project, product, etc.    
 
# Grievance redressal: Mechanisms for receiving, processing and addressing dissatisfaction expressed, complaints and other formal requests made by learners, staff and other stakeholders on the institutional provisions promised and perceived. 
 
h-index (Hirsch Index): An index that attempts to measure both the productivity and impact of the published work of a scientist or scholar. The index is based on the set of the scientist’s most cited papers and the number of citations that they have received in other publications. The index can also be applied to the productivity and impact of a group of scientists, such as a department or university or country. 
 
Human Resource Management: The process of assessing the human power requirements, recruiting, monitoring the growth and appraising them periodically and plan the staff development programs for the professional development and provide the necessary incentives and feedback. 
 
Humanities International Complete: A comprehensive database covering journals, books and reference sources in the humanities. This database provides citation information for articles, essays and reviews, as well as original creative works including poems and fiction. Photographs, paintings and illustrations are also referenced. 
 
ICT: Consists of the hardware, software, networks and media for the collection, storage, processing, transmission and presentation of information (voice, data, text, images) as well as related services.2 
 
Impact factor (IF): A measure of the citations to science and social sciences journals.  The impact factor for a journal is calculated based on a three-year period and can be considered to be the average number of times published papers are cited up to 2 years after publication. 
 
Incinerator: Waste destruction in a furnace by controlled burning at high temperatures.  
 
Infrastructure: Physical facilities like building, play fields, hostels etc. which help run an institutional program.  
 
Institutional Eligibility for Quality Assessment (IEQA): Eligibility granted to an Affiliated / Constituent colleges which are seeking assessment and accreditation for the first time.  
 
Institutional Social Responsibility (ISR): Focuses on the institution’s responsibilities to the public in terms of protection of public health, safety and the environment, the public ethical behavior and the need to practice good citizenship. 
 
# Interdisciplinary research: An integrative approach in which information from more than one discipline is used in interpreting the content of a subject, phenomenon, theory or principle. 
 
Internal Quality Assurance System (IQAS): Self regulated responsibilities of the higher education institutions aimed at continuous improvement of quality for achieving academic and administrative excellence. 
 
Leadership: Term used for setting direction and create a student-focused, learning oriented climate, clear and visible values and high expectation by ensuring the creation of strategies, system and methods for achieving excellence, stimulating innovation and building knowledge and capabilities. 
 
Learning outcomes: Specific intentions of a programme or module, written in clear terms. They describe what a student should know, understand, or be able to do at the end of that programme or module. 
 
Library as a learning resource: The library holdings in terms of titles of books, journals and other learning materials and technology aided learning mechanism, which enable the students to acquire information, knowledge and skills required for their study. 
 
# New technologies: Digital tools and resources (hardware and software) and their application in the field of education. 
 
# Open educational resources: Educational materials and resources offered freely and openly for anyone to use and under some licenses to re-mix, improve and redistribute. 
 
Optimum utilization of infrastructure: The infrastructure facilities are made available to the student for their maximum utilization. e.g. Extended hours for computer center and library, sharing of facilities for interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary programs. 
 
Organizational structure: The structure and functions of an institution to co-ordinate academic and administrative planning. 
 
Outreach activities: Is the practice of conducting local public awareness activities through targeted community interaction. They are guided by a local needs assessment. 
 
Participative management: Refers to an open form of management where employees are actively involved in the institution’s decision making process.  
 
Perspective development: Is a blue print regarding the objectives and targets of long term growth.   
 
Physical facilities: Infrastructure facilities of the institution to run the educational programs efficiently and the growth of the infrastructure to keep pace with the academic growth of the institution. 
 
Program options: A range of courses offered to students to choose at various levels leading to degrees/ diplomas/ certificates. 
 
Promotion of research and research support system: The process of promoting research culture among faculty and students by facilitating faculty and student participation in research budget allocation, research fellowship and other faculties. 
 
Remedial courses: Courses offered to academically disadvantaged students in order to help them cope with academic requirements. 
 
Research: Systematic intellectual investigations aimed at discovering, interpreting and revising human knowledge. 
 
Research grant: Grant generated/ received from different agencies by the institution for conducting research projects.  
 
Research output: Quality research outcome beneficial for the discipline, society, industry and dissemination of knowledge including theoretical and practical findings. 
 
Resource mobilization: Generation of funds through internal and external sources such as donations, consultancy, self-financing courses and so on. 
 
Scopus: The world’s largest abstract and citation database of peer-reviewed literature and quality web sources. 
 
SJR (Sclmago Journal Rank): This takes three years of publication data into account to assign relative scores to all the sources (journal articles, conference proceedings, review articles, etc.) in a citation network (Journals in SCOPUS database).  
 
SNIP (Source Normalized Impact per Person): Is the ratio of the source’s average citation count per paper in a three year citation window over the “citation potential” of its subject field.  
 
Stakeholder relationship: Affiliation and interaction with groups or individuals who have an interest in the actions of the institutions and the ability to influence its actions, decisions, policies, practices or goals of the organization. 
 
# Strategic Plan: A specific, action-oriented medium or long-term plan for making progress towards a set of institutional goals. 
 
Strategy development: Formulation of objectives, directives and guidelines with specific plans for institutional development. 
 
Student profile: The student community of the institution, their strength and the diversity in terms of economic and social strata, location and other demographic aspects such as gender, age, religion, caste, rural/ urban. 
 
Student progression: Vertical movement of students from one level of education to the next higher level successfully or towards gainful employment. 
 
Student support: Facilitating mechanism for access to information fee structure and refund policies and also guidance and placement cell with student welfare measures to give necessary learning support to the students. 
 
Teacher quality: A composite term to indicate the qualification of the faculty, the adequacy meant for recruitment procedures, professional development, recognition and teachers characteristics. 
 
Teaching-learning process: Learner-centered education through appropriate methodologies to facilitate effective teaching and learning. 
 
Twinning programmes: An arrangement between two institutions where a provider in source country A collaborates with a provider in Country B to allow students to take course credits in Country B and/or in source Country A. Only one qualification is awarded by the provider in source Country A. Arrangements for twinning programs and awarding of degrees usually comply with national regulations of the provider in source Country A. 
 
Web of Science: An online academic citation index designed for providing access to multiple databases, cross-disciplinary research, and in-depth exploration of specialized subfields within an academic or scientific discipline. 
 
Weightages:  Taking cognizance of the different types of educational institutions, differential scores are assigned to the criteria and key aspects.  
 
 
 
# 	From Quality Assurance Toolkit for Distance Higher Education Institutions and Programmes. 
 
  
1 Bowden et al 2000 from http://www.curtin.edu.my/T&L/doc/Graduate_Attributes.pdf  
2 World Bank  http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/EXTEDUCATION 
---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

Manual for Autonomous Colleges                                                                            Page 1 of 77 
 

Manual for Autonomous Colleges                                                                            Page 1 of 77 
 

Manual for Autonomous Colleges                                                                            Page 1 of 77 
 

Manual for Autonomous Colleges                                                                            Page 10 of 77 
 

Manual for Autonomous Colleges                                                                            Page 10 of 77 
 

Manual for Autonomous Colleges                                                                            Page 10 of 77 
 

