 
A. GUIDELINES FOR ASSESSMENT AND ACCREDITATION 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
India has one of the largest and diverse education systems, in the world. Privatization, widespread expansion, increased autonomy and introduction of programs in new and emerging areas has improved access to higher education. At the same time it also led to widespread concern on the quality and relevance of the higher education. To address these concerns, the National Policy on Education (NPE, 1986) and the Programme of Action (PoA, 1992) that spelt out strategic plans for the policies, advocated the establishment of an independent National accreditation agency. 
Consequently, the NATIONAL ASSESSMENT AND ACCREDITATION COUNCIL (NAAC) was established in 1994 as an autonomous institution of the University Grants Commission (UGC). The mandate of NAAC as reflected in its vision statement is in making quality assurance an integral part of the functioning of Higher Education Institutions (HEIs).  
 
The NAAC functions through its General Council (GC) and Executive Committee (EC) where educational administrators, policy makers and senior academicians from a cross-section of Indian higher education system are represented. The Chairperson of the UGC is the President of the GC of the NAAC, the Chairperson of the EC is an eminent academician nominated by the President of GC (NAAC). The Director is the academic and administrative head of NAAC, and is the member-secretary of both the GC and the EC. In addition to the statutory bodies that steer its policies and core staff to support its activities, NAAC is advised by the advisory and consultative committees constituted from time to time.  
 
Vision and Mission  The vision of NAAC is: 
To make quality the defining element of higher education in India through a combination of self and external quality evaluation, promotion and sustenance initiatives. 
 
The mission statements of the NAAC aim at translating the NAAC’s vision into action plans and define specific tasks of NAAC engagement and endeavor as given below:    
 
• To arrange for periodic assessment and accreditation of institutions of higher education or units thereof, or specific academic programmes or projects; 
• To stimulate the academic environment for promotion of quality in teaching-learning and research in higher education institutions; 
• To encourage self-evaluation, accountability, autonomy and innovations in higher education; 
• To undertake quality-related research studies, consultancy and training programmes, and 
• To collaborate with other stakeholders of higher education for quality evaluation, promotion and sustenance. 
 
Striving to achieve its goals as guided by its vision and mission statements, NAAC primarily focuses on assessment of the quality of higher education institutions in the country.  The NAAC methodology for Assessment and Accreditation is very much similar to that followed by Quality Assurance (QA) agencies across the world and consists of self-assessment by the institution and external peer assessment by NAAC.  
 
 
II. CORE VALUES  
Throughout the world, Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) function in a dynamic environment.  The need to expand the system of higher education, the impact of technology on the educational delivery, the increasing private participation in higher education and the impact of globalization (including liberal cross-border and transnational educational imperatives), have necessitated marked changes in the Indian higher education system. These changes and the consequent shift in values have been taken into cognizance by NAAC while formulating the core values. Further to ensure external and internal validity and credibility, it is important to ground the QA process within a value framework which is suitable and appropriate to the National context.  
 
 
The accreditation framework of NAAC is thus based on five core values detailed below: 
 
(i) Contributing to National Development 
Most of the HEIs have a remarkable capacity to adapt to changes, and at the same time pursue the goals and objectives that they have set forth for themselves. Contributing to National Development has always been an implicit goal of Indian HEIs. The HEIs have a significant role in human resource development and capacity building of individuals, to cater to the needs of the economy, society and the country as a whole, thereby contributing to the development of the Nation. Serving the cause of social justice, ensuring equity, and increasing access to higher education are a few ways by which HEIs can contribute to the National Development. It is therefore appropriate that the Assessment and Accreditation (A&A) process of the NAAC looks into the ways HEIs have been responding to and contributing towards National Development.  
 
(ii) Fostering Global Competencies among Students 
The spiraling developments at the global level also warrant that the NAAC includes in its scope of assessment, skill development of students, on par with their counterparts elsewhere. With liberalization and globalization of economic activities, the need to develop skilled human resources of a high caliber is imperative. Consequently, the demand for internationally acceptable standards in higher education is evident.  Therefore, the accreditation process of NAAC needs to examine the role of HEIs in preparing the students to achieve core competencies, to face the global requirements successfully. This requires that the HEIs be innovative, creative and entrepreneurial in their approach, to ensure skill development amongst the students. Towards achieving this, HEIs may establish collaborations with industries, network with the neighborhood agencies/bodies and foster a closer relationship between the “world of skilled work” and the “world of competent-learning”.  
 
(iii) Inculcating a Value System among Students 
Although skill development is crucial to the success of students in the job market, skills are of less value in the absence of appropriate value systems. HEIs have to shoulder the responsibility of inculcating the desirable value systems amongst the students. In a country like India, with cultural pluralities and diversities, it is essential that students imbibe the appropriate values commensurate with social, cultural, economic and environmental realities, at the local, national and universal levels. Whatever be the pluralities and diversities that exist in the country, there is ample scope for debate about inculcating the core universal values like truth and righteousness apart from other values emphasised in the various policy documents of the country.  The seeds of values sown in the early stages of education, mostly aimed at cooperation and mutual understanding, have to be reiterated and re-emphasized at the higher educational institutions, through appropriate learning experiences and opportunities. The NAAC assessment therefore examines how these essential and desirable values are being inculcated in the students, by the HEIs. 
 
(iv) Promoting the Use of Technology 
Most of the significant developments that one can observe today can be attributed to the impact of Science and Technology. While the advantages of using modern tools and technological innovations in the day-to-day-life are well recognized, the corresponding changes in the use of new technologies, for teaching – learning and governance of HEIs, leaves much to be desired. Technological advancement and innovations in educational transactions have to be undertaken by all HEIs, to make a visible impact on academic development as well as administration. At a time when our educational institutions are expected to perform as good as their global partners, significant technological innovations have to be adopted. Traditional methods of delivering higher education have become less motivating to the large number of students. To keep pace with the developments in other spheres of human endeavor, HEIs have to enrich the learning experiences of their students by providing them with State- of- the- Art educational technologies. The campus community must be adequately prepared to make use of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) optimally. Conscious effort is also needed to invest in hardware, and to orient the faculty suitably.  
 
In addition to using technology as learning resources, managing the activities of the institution in a technology-enabled way will ensure effective institutional functioning. For example, documentation and data management in the HEIs are areas where the process of assessment by NAAC has made a significant impact. Moving towards electronic data management and having institutional website to provide ready and relevant information to stakeholders, are desirable steps in this direction. In other words, effective use of ICT in HEIs will be able to provide ICT literacy to the campus community, using ICT for resource sharing and networking, as well as adopting ICT-enabled administrative processes. Therefore, NAAC accreditation would look at how the HEIs have put in place their electronic data management systems and electronic resources and their access to internal and external stakeholders particularly the student community. 
 
(v) Quest for Excellence 
Contributing to nation-building and skills development of students, institutions should demonstrate a drive to develop themselves into centre’s of excellence. Excellence in all that they do, will contribute to the overall development of the system of higher education of the country as a whole. This ‘Quest for Excellence’ could start with the assessment or even earlier, by the establishment of the Steering Committee for the preparation of the Self Study Report (SSR) of an institution. Another step in this direction could be the identification of the strengths and weaknesses in the teaching and learning processes as carried out by the institution.  
 
The five core values as outlined above form the foundation for assessment of institutions that volunteer for accreditation by NAAC. In conformity with the goals and mission of the institution, the HEIs may also add to these their own core values.   
 
III. ASSESSMENT AND ACCREDITATION OF HIGHER EDUCATION   
     INSTITUTIONS  
The forces of globalization and liberalization influenced the Indian Higher education in a big way. In a situation where Higher education, similar to the goods and other services has to compete internationally, quality assurance becomes inevitable. Further Indian HEIs operate within a larger framework comprising of several agencies, national contexts and societal expectations and each of these have a unique rendition of the goals. At the functional level, the effectiveness of the HEI is reflected in the extent to which all these layers of goals mutually concur. In such contexts the A&A process is a beginning to bring in uniform quality and position HEIs  in such a way that they address more directly the quality provision and the expressed needs of the stakeholders.  
 
(i) Focus of Assessment   
NAAC assessment lays focus on the institutional developments with reference to three aspects: Quality initiative, Quality sustenance and Quality enhancement. The overall quality assurance framework of NAAC thus focuses on the values and desirable practices of HEIs and incorporates the core elements of quality assurance i.e. internal and external assessment for continuous improvement. The value framework of NAAC starts with its choice of unit of evaluation i.e. the Institution as a whole. The A&A process of NAAC which involves a combination of self evaluation and external peer evaluation implicitly or explicitly is concerned with looking at the developmental aspects of the HEIs in the context of quality.  
 
Self-evaluation is crucial in the process of A&A and has a tremendous contribution in promoting objectivity, self-analysis, reflection and professionalism on the part of HEIs. The self-evaluation proforma of NAAC provided as “manuals for self study” maps out different inputs, processes and outputs and facilitates HEIs to evaluate their strengths, weaknesses and areas for improvement. The self-evaluation process and the subsequent preparation of the Self-Study Report (SSR) to be submitted to NAAC involves the participation of all the stakeholders – management, faculty members, administrative staff, students, parents, employers, community and alumni. While the participation of internal stakeholders i.e. management, staff and students provide credibility and ownership to the activity and could lead to newer initiatives, interaction with the external stakeholders facilitate the development process of the institution and their educational services. Overall it is expected to serve as a catalyst for institutional self-improvement, promote innovation and strengthen the urge to excel.  
 
NAAC’s role in steering assessment does not stop with the coordinating function but extends to the post-accreditation activities especially in facilitating establishment of  strategic quality management systems for ensuring  continuous improvement. One of the major contributions of NAAC towards this is the promotion of Internal Quality Assurance Cell (IQAC) resulting in building a quality culture. The IQACs are not only expected to facilitate the internalization and institutionalization of quality, but also to activate the system and raise the institutional capabilities to higher levels ensuring continuous quality improvement.  
 
(ii) Criteria and Key Aspects for Assessment 
The criteria-based assessment of NAAC forms the backbone of the A&A. The seven criteria represent the core functions and activities of an institution and broadly focus on the issues which have a direct impact on teaching-learning, research, community development and the holistic development of the students. The NAAC has identified the following seven criteria to serve as the basis for assessment of HEIs: 
1. Curricular Aspects 
2. Teaching-Learning and Evaluation 
3. Research, Consultancy and Extension 
4. Infrastructure and Learning Resources 
5. Student Support and Progression 
6. Governance, Leadership and Management 
7. Innovations and Best Practices 
The Criteria-based assessment promotes judgment based on values.  For example the Criterion on “Governance, Leadership and Management” promotes the values such as participation, transparency, team work, systems view, justice, self-reliance and probity in public finance.  
 
The Key Aspects identified under each of the seven criteria reflect the processes and values of the HEI on which assessment is made. The questions under each of the Key Aspects focus in particular on the outcomes, the institutional provisions which contribute to these and their impact on student learning and development.  
      
      The strengths or weaknesses in one area may have an effect on quality in another area. Thus the issues addressed within the Criteria and Key Aspects are closely inter-related and may appear to be overlapping. The criteria and the Key Aspects are not a set of standards or measurement tools by themselves and do not cover everything which happens in every HEI. They are the levers for transformational change and  provide an external point of reference for evaluating the quality of the institution under assessment.  
       
     NAAC uses the same framework across the country. Using the same framework   across the country provides a common language about quality and makes it much easier for everyone to go in one direction and in evidence based policy making.  
 
1. Criterion I - Curricular Aspects: Depending on the responsibilities of various Institutions, this criterion deals with curriculum development and implementation process. The criterion looks into how the curriculum either assigned by a University or marginally supplemented or enriched by an institution, or totally remade, depending on the freedom allowed in curricular design, aligns with the institutional mission. It also considers the practices of an institution in initiating a wide range of programme options and courses that are in tune with the emerging national and global trends and relevant to the local needs. Apart from issues of diversity and academic flexibility, aspects on career orientation, multi-skill development and involvement of stakeholders in curriculum updation, are also gauged under this criterion. The focus of this criterion is captured in the following Key Aspects: 
 
 	KEY ASPECTS 
1.1(U)* Curriculum Design and Development  
     (For Universities and Autonomous Colleges) 
1. 1(A)* Curriculum Planning and Implementation  
       (For Affiliated/Constituent Colleges) 
1.2 Academic flexibility 
1.3 Curriculum Enrichment 
1.4 Feedback System 
* 
(U)- applicable only for Universities and  Autonomous Colleges 
(A)- applicable only for the Affiliated/Constituent Colleges  
 
 
1.1(U) Curriculum Design and Development (This key aspect is applicable only for 
Universities and  Autonomous Colleges) 
Universities and Autonomous colleges play a major role in the Curriculum Design and Development and thus are expected to have processes, systems and structures in place to shoulder this responsibility. Curriculum Design and Development is a complex process involving several steps and experts. It is a process of developing appropriate need-based curricula in consultation with expert groups, based on the feedback from stakeholders, resulting in the development of relevant programmes with flexibility, to suit the professional and personal needs of the students and realization of core values.  
  
The key aspect also considers the good practices of the institution in initiating a range of programme options and courses that are relevant to the local needs and in tune with the emerging national and global trends. 
 
1. 1(A)   Curriculum Planning and Implementation  
         (This key aspect is applicable only for the Affiliated/Constituent Colleges)     
The affiliated/constituent colleges’ curriculum is given by the affiliating University or other regulatory agencies. However, the colleges have to work out details for effectively operationalising the given curricula. The process involves orientation of the teachers who would handle the curriculum and proper planning of the transaction. It also requires an understanding on the various teachinglearning practices and their appropriate use.  
 
Since acquisition of competencies occurs at different paces for different learners it is required that the institutions have specific implementation plans identifying the time to be spent on specific components. In addition if the institution is providing specially designed courses it also has the responsibility to develop appropriate need based curricula in consultation with stakeholders. 
 
1.2 Academic Flexibility  
Academic flexibility refers to freedom in the use of the time-frame of the courses, horizontal mobility, inter-disciplinary options and others facilitated by curricular transactions. Supplementary enrichment programmes introduced as an initiative 

of the college, credit system and choice offered in the curriculum, in terms of programme, curricular transactions and time-frame options are also considered in this key aspect.  
 
1.3 Curriculum Enrichment   
Every academic institution translates the curriculum framework and the specified syllabus by rendering them into practical forms, in which the main focus is on the student attributes and on holistic development of the students so that he/she can display multiple skills and qualities.  For effective transaction of the curriculum it is required it is up-to date. For keeping the curriculum up-to-date and introduce appropriate changes within the given curriculum, several inputs are provided parallelly or sequentially. All these would be possible through introduction and use of quality materials which would enrich the curriculum and provide concrete referents for organizing the curriculum.  
 
1.4 Feedback System 
The process of revision and redesign of curricula is based on recent developments and feedback from the stakeholders. The feedback from all stakeholders in terms of its relevance and appropriateness in catering to the needs of the society/ economy/ environment are also considered in this key aspect.  
 
2. Criterion II - Teaching-Learning and Evaluation: This criterion deals with the efforts of an institution to serve students of different backgrounds and abilities, through effective teaching-learning experiences. Interactive instructional techniques that engage students in higher order ‘thinking’ and investigation, through the use of interviews, focused group discussions, debates, projects, presentations, experiments, practicum, internship and application of ICT resources, are important considerations. It also probes into the adequacy, competence as well as the continuous professional development of the faculty who handle the programmes of study. The efficiency of the techniques used to continuously evaluate the performance of teachers and students is also a major concern of this criterion. The focus of this criterion is captured in the following  Key Aspects: 
 
KEY ASPECTS 
 
2.1 Student Enrolment and Profile  
2.2 Catering to Student Diversity 
2.3 Teaching-Learning Process 
2.4 Teacher Quality 
2.5 Evaluation Process and Reforms 
2.6 Student Performance and Learning Outcomes                                 
 
2.1 Student Enrolment and Profile  
The process of admitting students to the programmes is by a transparent, welladministered mechanism, complying with all the norms of the concerned regulatory/governing agencies including state and central governments. Apart from the compliance to the various regulations the key aspect also considers the institutions efforts in ensuring equity and wide access as reflected from the student profile having representation of student community from different geographical area and socio-economic, cultural and educational backgrounds.  
 
2.2 Catering to Student Diversity 
The programmes and strategies adopted by institutions to satisfy the needs of the students from diverse backgrounds including backward community as well as from different locales. Gender equity and admission opportunity for differentlyabled students are also considered. 
   
2.3 Teaching-Learning Process 
Diversity of Learners in respect of their background, abilities and other personal attributes will influence the extent of their learning. The teaching-learning modalities of the institution are rendered to be relevant for the learner group. The learner-centered education through appropriate methodologies facilitates effective learning. Teachers provide a variety of learning experiences, including individual and collaborative learning. The teachers employ interactive and participatory approach creating a feeling of responsibility in learning and makes learning a process of construction of knowledge.  
 
2.4 Teacher Quality 
‘Teacher quality’ is a composite term to indicate the quality of teachers in terms of qualification of the faculty, teacher characteristics, the adequacy of recruitment procedures, faculty availability, professional development and recognition of teaching abilities. Teachers take initiative to learn and keep abreast of the latest developments, to innovate, continuously seek improvement in their work and strive for individual and institutional excellence.  
 
2.5 Evaluation Process and Reforms 
This Key Aspect looks at issues related to assessment of teaching, learning and evaluative processes and reforms, to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of the system. One of the purposes of evaluation is to provide development-inducing feedback. Further it should also help the teacher to plan appropriate activities for enhancing student performance. The qualitative dimension of evaluation is in its use for enhancing the competence of students. Innovative evaluation process is to gauge the knowledge and skills acquired at various levels of the programmes. 
 
2.6 Student Performance and Learning Outcomes    
Learning outcomes are the specifications of what a student should learn and demonstrate on successful completion of the cource or the programme. It can also be seen as the desired outcome of the learning process in terms of acquisition of the skills and knowledge. They are embedded in the curriculum. Achieving Learning Outcomes needs specific experiences to be provided to the students and evaluation of their attainment. A programme that states Learning Outcomes that are not evaluated or assessed gets neglected in implementation. Hence all the stated Learning Outcomes must be part of the evaluation protocol of the programme. Student assessment provides an indication of the areas where learning has happened and where it has to be improved upon.  
 
3. Criterion III - Research, Consultancy and Extension: This criterion seeks information on the policies, practices and outcomes of the institution, with reference to research, consultancy and extension. It deals with the facilities provided and efforts made by the institution to promote a ‘research culture’. The institution has the responsibility to enable faculty to undertake research projects useful to the society. Serving the community through extension, which is a social responsibility and a core value to be demonstrated by institutions, is also a major aspect of this criterion. The focus of this criterion is captured in the following Key Aspects: 
	 	KEY ASPECTS 
3.1 Promotion of Research  
3.2 Resource Mobilization for Research  3.3 Research Facilities 
            3.4 Research Publications and Awards    
3.5 Consultancy  
      3.6 Extension Activities and Institutional Social Responsibility             3.7 Collaborations  
3.1 Promotion of Research 
The process of promoting research culture among faculty and students is ensured by facilitating participation in research and related activities, providing resources and other facilities 
 
3.2 Resource Mobilization for Research 
The institution provides support in terms of  financial, academic and human resources required and timely administrative decisions to enable faculty to submit project proposals and/approach funding agencies for  mobilizing resources for Research. The institutional support to its faculty for submitting Research projects and securing external funding through flexibility in administrative processes and infrastructure and academic support are crucial for any institution to excel in Research. The faculty are empowered to take up research activities utilizing the existing facilities. The institution encourages its staff to engage in interdisciplinary and interdepartmental research activities and resource sharing.  
 
3.3 Research Facilities 
Required infrastructure in terms of space and equipment and support facilities are available on the campus for undertaking research. The institution collaborates with other agencies/ institutions/research bodies for sharing research facilities and undertaking collaborative research. 
 
3.4 Research Publications and Awards 
Exploration and reflection are crucial for any teacher to be effective in his/her job. Quality research outcome is beneficial for the discipline/ society/ industry/ region and the nation. Sharing of knowledge especially theoretical and practical findings of research, through various media enhances quality of teaching and learning.  
 
3.5 Consultancy 
Activity organized or managed by the Faculty for an external agency for which the expertise and the specific knowledge base of the faculty becomes the major input. The finances generated through consultancy are fairly utilized by the institution. The faculty taking up the consultancy is properly rewarded. 
 	 
3.6 Extension Activities and Institutional Social Responsibility (ISR) 
Learning activities have a visible element for developing sensitivities towards community issues, gender disparities, social inequity etc. and in inculcating values and commitment to society. Mutual benefit from affiliation and interaction with groups or individuals who have an interest in the activities of the institution and the ability to influence the actions, decisions, policies, practices or goals of the organization. Processes and strategies that relevantly sensitize students to the social  issues and contexts.  
 
Sustainable practices of the institution leading to superior performance resulting in successful outcome in terms of generating knowledge which will be useful for the learner as well as the community. 
 
Extension also is the aspect of education, which emphasizes community services. These are often integrated with curricula as extended opportunities, intended to help, serve, reflect and learn. The curriculum-extension interface has an educational value, especially in rural India. 
 
3.7 Collaborations 
There are formal agreement/ understanding between the institution and other HEIs or agencies for training/student exchange/faculty exchange/ research/resource sharing etc.  
 
4. Criterion IV - Infrastructure and Learning Resources: This criterion seeks to elicit data on the adequacy and optimal use of the facilities available in an institution to maintain the quality of academic and other programmes on the campus. It also requires information on how every constituent of the institution - students, teachers and staff - benefit from these facilities. Expansion of facilities to meet future development is included among other concerns. The focus of this criterion is captured in the following Key Aspects: 
	 	KEY ASPECTS 
4.1 Physical Facilities  
4.2 Library as a Learning Resource 
4.3 IT Infrastructure   
4.4 Maintenance of Campus Facilities 
 
4.1 Physical Facilities 
Adequate infrastructure facilities are key for effective and efficient conduct of the educational programmes.  The growth of the infrastructure thus has to keep pace with the academic developments in the institution. The other supportive facilities on the campus are developed to contribute to the effective ambience for curricular, extra- curricular and administrative activities. 
 
4.2 Library as a Learning Resource 
The library holdings in terms of books, journals and other learning materials and technology-aided learning mechanisms which enable students to acquire information, knowledge and skills required for their study programmes.  
 
 
 
4.3 IT Infrastructure  
The institution adopts policies and strategies for adequate technology deployment and maintenance. The ICT facilities and other learning resources are adequately available in the institution for academic and administrative purposes. The staff and students have access to technology and information retrieval on current and relevant issues. The institution deploys and employs ICTs for a range of activities.  
 
4.4 Maintenance of Campus Facilities 
The institution has sufficient resources allocated for regular upkeep of the infrastructure. There are effective mechanisms for the upkeep of the infrastructure facilities and promote the optimum use of the same. 
 
5. Criterion V - Student Support and Progression: The highlights of this criterion are the efforts of an institution to provide necessary assistance to students, to acquire meaningful experiences for learning at the campus and to facilitate their holistic development and progression. It also looks into student performance and alumni profiles and the progression of students to higher education and gainful employment. The focus of this criterion is captured in the following Key Aspects: 
	 	KEY ASPECTS 
 
 	5.1 Student Mentoring and Support  
5.2 Student Progression 
5.3 Student Participation and Activities   
 
5.1 Student Mentoring and Support 
Facilitating mechanisms like guidance cell, placement cell, grievance redressal cell and welfare measures to support students. Specially designed inputs are provided to the needy students with learning difficulties. Provision is made for bridge and value added courses in relevant areas. Institution has a well structured, organized guidance and counseling system in place.  
 
 
 
5.2 Student Progression 
The Institutions’ concern for students’ progression to higher studies and/or to employment is dealt with under this Key Aspect. Identify the reasons for poor attainment and plan and implement remedial measures. Sustainable good practices which effectively support the students facilitate optimal progression. The institutional provisions facilitate vertical movement of students from one level of education to the next higher level or towards gainful employment. 
 
5.3 Student Participation and Activities 
The institution promotes inclusive practices for social justice and better stakeholder relationships. The institution promotes value-based education for inculcating social responsibility and good citizenry amongst its student community.  
 
The institution has the required infrastructure and promotes active participation of the students in social, cultural and leisure activities. Encouraging students’ participation in activities facilitates developing various skills and competencies and foster holistic development. 
 
6. Criterion VI - Governance, Leadership and Management : This criterion helps gather data on the policies and practices of an institution in the matter of planning human resources, recruitment, training, performance appraisal, financial management and the overall role of leadership in institution building. The focus of this criterion is on the following Key Aspects: 
 
	 	KEY ASPECTS 
6.1 Institutional Vision and Leadership 
6.2 Strategy Development and Deployment 
6.3 Faculty Empowerment Strategies 
6.4 Financial Management and Resource Mobilization 
6.5 Internal Quality Assurance System (IQAS) 
 
6.1 Institutional Vision and Leadership 
Effective leadership by setting values and participative decision-making process is key not only to achieve the vision, mission and goals of the institution but also in building the organizational culture. The formal and informal arrangements in the institution to co-ordinate the academic and administrative planning and implementation reflects the institutions efforts in achieving its vision.  
 
6.2 Strategy Development and Deployment 
The leadership provides clear vision and mission to the institution. The functions of the institution and its academic and administrative units are governed by the principles of participation and transparency. Formulation of development objectives, directives and guidelines with specific plans for implementation by aligning the academic and administrative aspects improves the overall quality of the Institutional provisions. 
 
6.3 Faculty Empowerment Strategies 
The process of planning human resources including recruitment, performance appraisal and planning professional development programmes and seeking appropriate feedback, analysis  of  responses and ensure that they form the basis for planning. Efforts are made to upgrade the professional competence of the staff. There are mechanisms evolved for regular performance appraisal of staff. 
 
6.4 Financial Management and Resource Mobilization 
Budgeting and optimum utilization of finance, including mobilization of resources are the issues considered under this key aspect. There are established procedures and processes for planning and allocation of financial resources. The institution has developed strategies for mobilizing resources and ensures transparency in financial management of the institution. The income and expenditure of the institution are subjected to regular internal and external audit. 
 
6.5 Internal Quality Assurance System (IQAS) 
The internal quality assurance systems of HEIs are Self-regulated responsibilities of the higher education institutions, aimed at continuous improvement of quality and achieving academic excellence. The institution has mechanisms for academic auditing. The institution adopts quality management strategies in all academic and administrative aspects. The institution has an IQAC and adopts a participatory approach in managing its provisions.  
 
7. Criterion VII - Innovations and Best Practices: This criterion focuses on the innovative efforts of an institution that help in its academic excellence. An innovative practice could be a pathway created to further the interest of the student and the institution, for internal quality assurance, inclusive practices and stakeholder relationships.   
	 	KEY ASPECTS 
  7.1 Environment Consciousness 
              7.2 Innovations 
              7.3 Best Practices  
7.1 Environment Consciousness 
The institution displays sensitivity to issues like climate change and environmental issues. It adopts environment friendly practices and takes necessary actions such as – energy conservation, rain water harvesting, waste recycling, carbon neutral etc. 
 
7.2 Innovations 
The institution is geared to promote an ambience of creativity innovation and improving quality. 
 
7.3 Best Practices 
Practices of the institution leading to improvement and having visible impact on the quality of the institutional provisions are considered in this Key Aspect.  
 
IV. THE ASSESSMENT OUTCOME 
The assessment by NAAC takes a holistic view of all the inputs, processes and outcomes of an institution and thus the HEIs are expected to demonstrate how they achieve the objectives of the core values through the data and information detailed in the self study reports (SSR). The Assessment and Accreditation outcome includes a qualitative and quantitative component. The qualitative part of the outcome is the Peer Team Report (PTR) and the quantitative part includes a Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA), a letter grade and a performance descriptor.  
 
(i) Weightages 
Taking cognizance of the diversity in institutional functioning, HEIs have been grouped under three major categories i.e.  Universities, Autonomous colleges and Affiliated colleges and differential weightages are assigned for each of the seven criteria as detailed in the table below: 
 
Criteria Key Aspects Universities Autonomous Colleges Affiliated Colleges 1. Curricular  
Aspects 
 1.1 *(U)Curriculum 
Design and Development   50 50 NA 1.1. *(A) Curricular Planning and 
Implementation NA NA 20 1.2 Academic Flexibility 50 50 30 1.3 Curriculum 
Enrichment   30 30 30 1.4 Feedback System     20 20 20 Total 
 150 150 100 2. TeachingLearning and 
Evaluation 
 2.1 Student Enrolment and Profile 10 30 30 2.2 Catering to Student 
Diversity    20 40 50 2.3 Teaching-Learning 
Process  50 100 100 2.4 Teacher Quality     50 60 80 2.5 Evaluation Process and Reforms    40 30 50 2.6 Student Performance and Learning Outcomes   30 40 40 Total 
 200 300 350 3. Research, 
Consultancy and Extension 
 3.1 Promotion of 
Research  20 20 20 3.2 Resource Mobilization for  Research  20 20 10 
 
Criteria Key Aspects Universities Autonomous Colleges Affiliated Colleges  3.3 Research  Facilities 30 20 10 3.4 Research Publications and Awards   100 20 20 3.5 Consultancy 20 10 10 3.6 Extension Activities and Institutional Social Responsibility     40 50 60 3.7 Collaboration  20 10 20 Total 
 250 150 150 4.Infrastructure and 
Learning 
Resources 
 4.1 Physical Facilities  30 30 30 4.2 Library as a Learning 
Resource 20 20 20 4.3 IT Infrastructure   30 30 30 4.4 Maintenance of 
Campus Facilities 20 20 20 Total 
 100 100 100 5. Student 
Support and 
Progression 
 5.1 Student Mentoring and Support  40 40 50 5.2 Student Progression  40 40 30 5.3 Student Participation and Activities  20 20 20 Total 
 100 100 100 6. Governance 
Leadership and 
Management 
 
 6.1 Institutional Vision and Leadership 10 10 10 6.2 Strategy Development and Deployment   10 10 10 6.3 Faculty 
Empowerment Strategies   30 
 30 30 6.4 Financial 
Management and 
Resource Mobilization   20 20 20 6.5 Internal Quality 
Assurance System   30 30 30 Total 
 100 100 100 Criteria Key Aspects Universities Autonomous Colleges Affiliated Colleges 7. Innovations and Best Practices  
 7.1 Environment 
Consciousness 30 30 30 7.2 Innovations  30 30 30 7.3 Best Practices 40 40 40 Total 
 100 100 100  TOTAL SCORE  1000 1000 1000 * 
(U)- applicable only for Universities and  Autonomous Colleges 
(A)- applicable only for the Affiliated/Constituent Colleges 
 
(ii) Grading System 
The accreditation status of the assessed HEIs is decided using the weightages detailed above. Institutions will be assessed and graded on a four point scale and qualifying institutions accredited and graded on a 3- letter grade as follows: 
 
Range of institutional Cumulative Grade 
Point Average (CGPA) Letter 
Grade Performance Descriptor 3.01-4.00 A  Very Good (Accredited) 2.01-3.00 B Good 
(Accredited) 1.51-2.00 C Satisfactory (Accredited) ? 1.50 D  Unsatisfactory (Not Accredited)  
Institutions which secure a CGPA equal to or less than 1.50 and graded “D” does not qualify for accreditation. Such unqualified institutions will be intimated and notified by the NAAC as “assessed and found not qualified for accreditation”.  
 
(iii) Validity Period of Accreditation  
The accreditation status is valid for five years from the date of approval by the Executive Committee of the NAAC. To continue the status of accreditation the institution has to record its intent for the next cycle accreditation by submitting the LOI six months before the expiry of the accreditation status and the SSR within six months of acceptance of the LOI by NAAC. Institutions that do not adhere to these timelines will lose the accreditation status. 
 
V. ELIGIBILITY FOR ASSESSMENT AND ACCREDITATION BY NAAC  
1) The following types of Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) are eligible to apply for the process of Assessment and Accreditation (A&A) of NAAC, if they have a record of offering degree programmes and atleast two batches of students having graduated from them and fulfill the other conditions or are covered by the other provisions, if any, mentioned below: 
a) Universities (Central/State, including Private) and Institutions of National Importance  
• Provided that in case of professional Universities / Institutions of National Importance, their record of atleast two batches of students having graduated. 
• Provided further that the duly established campuses within the country or off-shore campuses, if any, shall be treated as part of the universities / Institutions of National Importance for the A&A process. 
b) Colleges (i.e., colleges/institutions affiliated to or constituent of or  recognized by universities, including autonomous colleges)  
• Provided Teacher Education / Physical Education colleges shall have a standing of atleast three years. 
• However, colleges/institutions offering programmes recognized by Statutory Professional Regulatory Councils concerned as equivalent to a degree programme of a university shall also be eligible for A&A even if such colleges/institutions are not affiliated to a university.  
 
2) Deemed to be Universities declared under Section 3 of the UGC Act are eligible for the A&A process of NAAC, regardless of the number of years of establishment. A deemed university needs to opt for A&A of all its duly approved constituent units, campuses at various locations within the country and off-shore campuses, if any. 
However, if the deemed university has any unit/campus which is not approved by MHRD/UGC, the deemed university itself shall not be eligible for A&A. 
 
3) Departments of Teacher Education / Physical Education 
Provided that the Departments of Teacher Education / Physical Education, if any, may opt for A&A: 
• if such departments shall have a standing of atleast three years and have a record of atleast two batches of students having graduated from them; and  
• either along with the University / College or after the University / College has already been accredited. 
 
4) Any other HEIs at the discretion of NAAC. 
Note: The NAAC accreditation does not cover distance education units of HEIs. For details on the process and the time schedules please refer NAAC website:  
http://www.naac.gov.in  
 
 
VI. THE ASSESSMENT PROCESS 
NAAC believes that an institution that really understands itself – it’s strengths, it’s weaknesses, it’s potentials and limitations - is likely to be effective in carrying out it’s educational mission and make continuous improvement. Thus the A&A of NAAC includes a self evaluation by the institution that is expected to be done with honest introspection followed by an external Peer evaluation by NAAC. Self evaluation by the institution and an external peer assessment are inevitable for Quality assurance.  
 
Some of the important stages in A&A of HEIs are given below: 
 
a) On-line submission of Letter of Intent (LoI) and/or application for Institutional Eligibility for Quality Assessment (IEQA) 
All HEIs fulfilling the eligibility criteria (as at section V above) for undergoing A&A are expected to submit a LoI online to NAAC. On scrutiny of the LoI and confirming the fulfillment of the eligibility criteria by NAAC:  
• Affiliated and Constituent colleges need to submit the application for IEQA status on-line. These institutions become eligible for submission of the SSR only after qualifying / acquiring the IEQA status.  
• Affiliated/constituent colleges opting for second, third or fourth cycle of A&A, Universities, Autonomous colleges, colleges with Potential for Excellence (CPE) and Professional Institutions (other than Teacher Education and Physical Education)  need not undergo the IEQA stage and once found eligible can go ahead with  submitting  the SSR.                                                                                  
 
b) Preparation of the Self-Study Report (SSR)   
The assessment process aims at providing an opportunity for the institution to measure its effectiveness and efficiency, identify its strengths and weaknesses and take necessary steps for improvement. Thus the most important step in the process of assessment and accreditation is the preparation of the SSR by the institution. While preparing the SSR, institutions should follow the guidelines provided by NAAC and ensure that the SSR contains information on the following: 
- Evidence of contributing to the core values 
- Evidence of building on the strengths identified by the institutions 
- Action taken to rectify the deficiencies noted by the institutions 
- Substantive efforts made by the institution over a period of time, towards quality enhancement 
- Specific future plans of the institution for quality enhancement 
 
The institutional efforts to prepare the SSR will be an intensive but self-rewarding exercise for institutions. To maximise the benefits of such an effort, the self-evaluation must have the total commitment of the governing body, administration and every member of the faculty of the institution.  All the constituents of the institution should not only be kept fully informed but also be as closely involved in the self-study as possible. To achieve the objectives of self-evaluation, the Head of the institution has to play a positive and creative role.  To assist him/her a Steering Committee consisting of 4 to 6 members may be constituted which will co-ordinate the compilation and analysis of data related to the various aspects of the institution and its functions. This committee could be responsible for organizing the information and data and to prepare a comprehensive SSR, to be submitted to the NAAC. As the Steering Committee will have to play an active role in the preparation of the SSR, it should be ensured that the coordinator of the steering committee has considerable communication skills and the ability to organize and direct a complex institutional endeavour.  S/he must be able to motivate others. During the on-site visit of the peer team, the coordinator of the steering committee may also function as the institutional facilitator.  
 
The institution has to prepare the SSR following the structure given below and submit it to NAAC in five copies (in case of Affiliated/Constituent/Autonomous colleges)/in eight copies (in case of Universities) and a digital/electronic version (CD).  
 
Structure of the SSR to be submitted to NAAC:  
A. Preface or cover letter from the Head of the Institution 
B. Executive Summary- The SWOC analysis of the institution  
C. Profile of the Institution 
D. Criteria-wise analytical report –The institution should provide consolidated response for each of the Key Aspects.  It is not expected to respond question wise. The questions are only pointers and the responses should provide a holistic view describing institutional inputs, processes and outcomes covering the Key Aspect. 
E. Inputs from each of the Department in the format provided. However in smaller colleges where there are no specific departments in vogue, the college may use the proforma and provide programme wise details. 
 
A bulky SSR with too many details and descriptions may result in lack of clarity. Such a report would also lack focus and would generate more information gaps than explanations. Even for a large and complex institution, it is possible to restrict the essential documentation to manageable proportions. Put together the Executive Summary, Profile of the Institution and Criteria-wise analytical report of the  SSR should not exceed 200 pages (A4 size pages, both sides printing, MS WORD keeping single line space, 12 of Times New Roman font and one and half inches margin on each side of the page). The departmental inputs could be in addition to the above.  Inclusion of Appendices in the SSR is to be avoided. Appendices may be made available to the Peer Team during the ‘On-site visit’. 
 
c)  Peer Assessment and Final Outcome 
On receipt of the SSR, NAAC undertakes an in-house analysis of the report and looks into its completeness. On ensuring the fulfillment of the various conditions NAAC processes for organizing the peer team visit to the institution. Depending on the size of the institution, the site visit may vary from two to four days. As the ultimate goal and the efforts of NAAC is to facilitate HEIs to excellence the external peers have an important role in evaluating and synthesizing the outcomes on individual Key Aspects within the contextual framework of the HEI and to arrive at an overall assessment. Thus NAAC periodically orients senior educationists and experts in specialized areas of study from across the country and empanels them to undertake the A&A exercise. As the whole exercise is a transparent and partnered activity, while constituting the peer team NAAC consults the institution about any justifiable reservation it may have about any member of the visiting team constituted by NAAC.  
 
Peer Team Visit to the Institution: The peer team constituted by NAAC visits the institution and assesses the quality of its provisions. To validate the self-study report, the team looks for evidences through interactions with the various constituents and stakeholders of the institution, checking documents and visiting the various units of the institution. At the end of the visit, for ensuring accuracy of institutional data / information the team shares the draft Peer Team Report (PTR) with the Head of the Institution. The PTR duly signed by the Head of the institution and the peer team members along with the criterion-wise Grade Point Averages (GPA), the final Institutional Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) and the Institutional Grade, is submitted to NAAC for further processing. 
 
Final decision by NAAC: The Executive Committee (EC) of the NAAC will review the peer team report, the criterion-wise Grade Point Averages (Cr.GPA), the final Institutional Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA), the Institutional Grade recommended by the Peer Team and the feedback received from the institution and the Peer team and takes the final decision on the accreditation status and the institutional grade.  The status of accreditation along with the PTR and the institutional grade approved by the EC will be made public by posting them on the website of the NAAC. Institutions which do not attain the accreditation status will be notified accordingly.  
 
VII. MECHANISM FOR INSTITUTIONAL APPEALS 
Provision for Appeals is one of the good practices followed by external Quality Assurance Agencies.   NAAC has also prescribed the mechanism for appeals. An aggrieved institution can make a written representation to the Director, NAAC with the payment of a non-refundable fee of Rs.20, 000/- within one month from the date of receipt of the accreditation certificate from the NAAC. The five-member Appeals Committee constituted for the purpose will consider the appeal and make recommendations for the consideration of Executive Committee (EC) of NAAC. The EC decision is binding on the institutions. For details, refer to the NAAC website: 
www.naac.gov.in  
 
VIII. RE-ASSESSMENT 
Institutions, which would like to make an improvement in the accredited status, may volunteer for Re-assessment, after a minimum of one year or before three years of accreditation.  The manual to be followed for re-assessment is the same as that for the Assessment and Accreditation. However, the institution shall make specific responses based on the recommendations made by the peer team in the previous assessment and accreditation report, as well as the specific quality improvements made by the institution during the intervening period. The fee structure and other procedures would be the same as that for initial Assessment and Accreditation with the exception that the Institutions that volunteer for re-assessment will not be eligible for reimbursement of accreditation expenses, as per the “Guidelines of UGC assistance for Assessment and Accreditation”.  
 
 
IX. SUBSEQUENT CYCLES OF ACCREDITATION  
The methodology for subsequent cycles of accreditation i.e. second, third, fourth and so on would remain the same. However due consideration would be given to the post-accreditation activities resulting in quality improvement, quality sustenance and quality enhancement. In the SSRs institutions opting for subsequent cycles of accreditation need to highlight the significant quality sustenance and enhancement measures undertaken during the last four years (narrative not exceeding 10 pages). A functional Internal Quality Assurance Cell (IQAC) and timely submission of Annual Quality Assurance Reports (AQARs) are the Minimum Institutional Requirements (MIR) to volunteer for second, third or fourth cycle accreditation.    
 
To volunteer for subsequent cycle of accreditation, institutions should record their intent six months before the expiry of the accreditation status and initiate institutional preparations for submission of SSRs. The institutions which record their intent to volunteer for subsequent cycle of accreditation and submit the SSRs within the stipulated time may continue to use the outcome of the previous cycle of accreditation till the status of next cycle Accreditation is declared by NAAC.  
 
Institutions which fail to express intent for subsequent cycle of accreditation within the stipulated time will lose their accreditation status on completion of the five year validity period. 
 

 
X. THE FEE STRUCTURE AND OTHER FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS  
 
For seeking IEQA Status  Affiliated and Constituent Colleges seeking assessment and accreditation for the first-time  
 
For assessment and accreditation of Universities  Rs. 2,000/- (each time)  Upto four departments  Rs. 1,00,000/-  More than four, but upto ten departments  
 Rs. 1,00,000/- + Rs.15,000/- for each additional department  More than ten departments  
 Rs. 1,90,000/- + 
Rs.10,000/- for each                                                   additional department  The accreditation fee will be limited to a maximum amount of Rs. 5,00,000/- per institution.  
 
For assessment and accreditation of General Colleges  
College with multi faculties i.e., Arts and Science 	Rs. 75,000/-  (Commerce will be treated as a part of Arts faculty)  
	College with mono faculty viz., 	Rs. 50,000/-  
Arts/Commerce/Science/Law or any other  
 
For assessment and accreditation of Teacher Education / Physical Education 
Institutions and Departments  
Teacher education institutions / physical education 	Rs. 50,000/-  institutions  
	Teacher education department of a general college 	Rs. 25,000/-  
conducting Teacher Education / Physical Education 
Programme (s)  
University teaching departments of Teacher Education Rs. 25,000/-  / Physical Education  
 
For the HEIs recognized under 2(f) & 12B of the UGC Act, the expenditure on accreditation would be reimbursed by UGC through the NAAC. For more details refer NAAC Website: http://www.naac.gov.in/sites/naac.gov.in/files/Revised-UGCGuidelines-HEIs-2009.pdf.  
 	 
 
 
 	 

B. Profile of the University 
 
 
1. Name and Address of the University:  
 
Name:  Address: City: Pin:  State: Website:  
 
2. For communication:  
 
Designation  Name 
    Telephone with STD code Mobile  
 Fax  Email  Vice Chancellor  O:  R:    Pro Vice Chancellor (s)  O:  R:    Registrar  O:  R:    Steering Committee / IQAC Co-ordinator  O:  R:     
3. Status of the University:  State University State Private University 
Central University  
      	 University under Section 3 of UGC (Deemed University) 
Institution of National Importance 
Any other (please specify)  
 
  4. Type of University: Unitary 
Affiliating 
 
   5. Source of funding: Central Government    
State Government    
Self-financing  
Any other (please specify) 
 
 
6. a.  Date of establishment of the university: …………………… (dd/mm/yyyy) 
b.  Prior to the establishment of the university, was it a/an   
i. PG Centre  	                        Yes             No      
ii. Affiliated College 	 	Yes             No  iii. Constituent College              Yes             No  
iv. Autonomous College              Yes             No            
v. Any other (please specify)           ……………………   
If yes, give the date of establishment …………………… (dd/mm/yyyy)  
 
7. Date of recognition as a university by UGC or any other national agency: 
 
Under Section dd mm yyyy Remarks  i. 2f of UGC*     ii. 12B of UGC *     iii. 3 of UGC #     iv. Any other ^ (specify)       * Enclose certificate of recognition.   
# Enclose notification of MHRD and UGC for all courses / programmes / campus/campuses.   
^ Enclose certificate of recognition by any other national agency/agencies, if any.    
 
8. Has the university been recognized   
a. By UGC as a University with Potential for Excellence?     
	        Yes    	No  
     If yes, date of recognition : …………………… (dd/mm/yyyy) 
 
b. For its performance by any other governmental agency? 
	        Yes    	No  
 	If yes, Name of the agency …………………… and                  date of recognition: …………………… (dd/mm/yyyy) 
 
9. Does the university have off-campus centres?  
Yes           No    
     If yes, date of establishment : …………………… (dd/mm/yyyy)                  date of recognition      : …………………… (dd/mm/yyyy) 
 
10. Does the university have off-shore campuses?  
Yes           No    
     If yes, date of establishment : …………………… (dd/mm/yyyy)                  date of recognition      : …………………… (dd/mm/yyyy) 
 
 
 
 
11. Location of the campus and area:   
 	 Location * Campus area in acres Built  up area in sq. mts.  i. Main campus area     ii. Other campuses in the country     iii. Campuses abroad        (* Urban, Semi-Urban, Rural, Tribal, Hilly Area, Any other (please specify) 
 
If the university has more than one campus, it may submit a consolidated selfstudy report reflecting the activities of all the campuses.   
 
12. Provide information on the following: In case of multi-campus University, please provide campus-wise information.   
• Auditorium/seminar complex with infrastructural facilities 
• Sports facilities 
? playground 
? swimming pool 
? gymnasium   
? Any other (please specify)  
• Hostel  
? Boys’ hostel  
i. Number of hostels 
ii. Number of inmates 
iii. Facilities  ? Girls’ hostel  
i. Number of hostels 
ii. Number of inmates 
iii. Facilities  ? Working women’s hostel   i. Number of hostels 
 ii. Number of inmates iii. Facilities  
• Residential facilities for faculty and non-teaching   
• Cafeteria 
• Health centre – Nature of facilities available – inpatient, outpatient, ambulance, emergency care facility, etc.     
• Facilities like banking, post office, book shops, etc.   
• Transport facilities to cater to the needs of the students and staff 
• Facilities for persons with disabilities    
• Animal house  
• Incinerator for laboratories  
• Power house 
• Waste management facility 
 
13. Number of institutions affiliated to the university  
Type of colleges Total Permanent  Temporary  Arts, Science and Commerce    Law    Medicine    Engineering     Education    Management     Others (specify and provide details)     
14. Does the University Act provide for conferment of autonomy (as recognized by the UGC) to its affiliated institutions? If yes, give the number of autonomous colleges under the jurisdiction of the University 
 
 	Yes  	No                             Number 	
 
15. Furnish the following information:  
Particulars Number Number of Students a. University Departments  
Undergraduate  Post graduate 
Research centres on the campus    b. Constituent colleges    c. Affiliated colleges     d. Colleges under 2(f)   e. Colleges under 2(f) and 12B    f. NAAC accredited colleges    g. Colleges with Potential for Excellence (UGC)   h. Autonomous colleges    i. Colleges with Postgraduate Departments     j. Colleges with Research Departments    k. University recognized Research Institutes/Centres     
 
16. Does the university conform to the specification of Degrees as enlisted by the 
UGC?  Yes     No                              
	 	If the university uses any other nomenclatures, please specify.  
 
17. Academic programmes offered by the university departments at present, under the following categories: (Enclose the list of academic programmes offered)  
 
Programmes Number UG  PG  Integrated Masters  M.Phil.   Ph.D.   Integrated Ph.D.  Certificate   Diploma   PG Diploma   Any other (please specify)    Total    
18. Number of working days during the last academic year. 
 
19. Number of teaching days during the past four academic years.  

(‘Teaching days’ means days on which classes were engaged. Examination days are not to be included) 
 
20. Does the university have a department of Teacher Education? 
 	  Yes  	No  
 
	 	If yes,  
a. Year of establishment ……………… (dd/mm/yyyy) 
  	 	 
b. NCTE recognition details (if applicable)   
Notification No.: …………………………………… Date: …………………………… (dd/mm/yyyy) 
 
c. Is the department opting for assessment and accreditation separately?  
	 	 	Yes  	No  
 
21. Does the university have a teaching department of Physical Education? 
 	  Yes  	No  
	 	If yes,  
a. Year of establishment ……………… (dd/mm/yyyy) 
  	  	 
b. NCTE recognition details (if applicable)   
Notification No.: …………………………………… Date: …………………………… (dd/mm/yyyy) 
 
c. Is the department opting for assessment and accreditation separately?  
	 	 	Yes  	No  
 
22. In the case of Private and Deemed Universities, please indicate whether professional programmes are being offered?  
 	    Yes  	No  
 If yes, please enclose approval / recognition details issued by the statutory body governing the programme.   
  
23. Has the university been reviewed by any regulatory authority? If so, furnish a copy of the report and action taken there upon.    
 
24. Number of positions in the university   
 
Positions 
  Teaching faculty Non-teaching 
staff Technical staff Professor  Associate Professor  Assistant Professor  Sanctioned 	by 	the  
UGC / University / 
State Government  
Recruited  Yet to recruit      Number of persons 
working on contract basis         
 
25. Qualifications of the teaching staff 
 
Highest qualification Professor Associate Professor Assistant Professor Total Male   Female Male   Female Male   Female  Permanent teachers D.Sc./D.Litt.          Ph.D.          M.Phil.          PG        Temporary teachers Ph.D.         M.Phil.          PG          Highest qualification Professor Associate Professor Assistant Professor Total Male   Female Male   Female Male   Female  Part-time teachers Ph.D.          M.Phil.          PG           
26. Emeritus, Adjunct and Visiting Professors.  
 Emeritus Adjunct Visiting  Number      
27. Chairs instituted by the university:  
 Chairs  School / Department   
28. Students enrolled in the university departments during the current academic year, with the following details:   
Students  UG PG Integrat ed 
Masters  M.Phil.  Ph.D.  Integr ated 
Ph.D.  D.Litt.
/ 
D.Sc.   Certifi cate   Diplo ma  PG 
Diplo ma  *M *F  *M *F  *M *F  *M *F  *M *F  *M *F  *M *F  *M *F  *M *F  *M *F  From the state where 
the university is located            From other states of India            NRI 
students            Foreign students            Total           *M-Male  *F-Female 
 
29. ‘Unit cost’ of education   
(Unit cost = total annual recurring expenditure (actual) divided by total number of students enrolled)  
      (a) including the salary component = Rs. ………………..       (b) excluding the salary component = Rs. ………………. 
 
30. Academic Staff College 
• Year of establishment  …………  
• Number of programmes conducted (with duration)   
? UGC Orientation  
? UGC Refresher 
? University’s own programmes   
 
31. Does the university offer Distance Education Programmes (DEP)?  
	 	Yes  		No  
If yes, indicate the number of programmes offered. 
	Are they recognized by the Distance Education Council?  	 
 
32. Does the university have a provision for external registration of students? 
	 Yes   	No  
 If yes, how many students avail of this provision annually?   
 
33. Is the university applying for Accreditation or Re-Assessment? If Accreditation, name the cycle.  
       Accreditation:        Cycle 1   	Cycle 2          Cycle 3          Cycle 4         	Re-Assessment:    
 
34. Date of accreditation* (applicable for Cycle 2, Cycle 3, Cycle 4 and re-assessment only)   Cycle 1: …………………… (dd/mm/yyyy), Accreditation outcome/Result ……   Cycle 2: …………………… (dd/mm/yyyy), Accreditation outcome/Result ……   
Cycle 3: …………………… (dd/mm/yyyy), Accreditation outcome/Result ……   
Cycle 4: …………………… (dd/mm/yyyy), Accreditation outcome/Result ……   
* Kindly enclose copy of accreditation certificate(s) and peer team report(s)    
 	 
35. Does the university provide the list of accredited institutions under its jurisdiction on its website? Provide details of the number of accredited affiliated / constituent / autonomous colleges under the university.   
 
36. Date of establishment of Internal Quality Assurance Cell (IQAC) and dates of submission of Annual Quality Assurance Reports (AQAR). 
IQAC              …………………… (dd/mm/yyyy) 
AQAR  (i)    ……………… (dd/mm/yyyy)   (ii)   ……………… (dd/mm/yyyy)   (iii)  ……………… (dd/mm/yyyy)   (iv)  ……………… (dd/mm/yyyy) 
 
37. Any other relevant data, the university would like to include (not exceeding one page).   
 
C. Criteria-wise Inputs  
 
CRITERION I: CURRICULAR ASPECTS  
	1.1  	Curriculum Design and Development   
1.1.1  How is the institutional vision and mission reflected in the academic programmes of the university? 
1.1.2 Does the university follow a systematic process in the design and development of the curriculum? If yes, give details of the process (need assessment, feedback, etc.). 
1.1.3 	How are the following aspects ensured through curriculum design and development? 
? Employability 
? Innovation  
? Research  
1.1.4  To what extent does the university use the guidelines of the regulatory bodies for developing and/or restructuring the curricula? Has the university been instrumental in leading any curricular reform which has created a national impact?   
1.1.5 Does the university interact with industry, research bodies and the civil society in the curriculum revision process? If so, how has the university benefitted through interactions with the stakeholders?   
1.1.6  Give details of how the university facilitates the introduction of new programmes of studies in its affiliated colleges.   
1.1.7 Does the university encourage its colleges to provide additional skill-oriented programmes relevant to regional needs? Cite instances (not applicable for unitary universities).   
 
	1.2  	Academic Flexibility 
	1.2.1 	Furnish the inventory for the following: 
? Programmes taught on campus  
? Overseas programmes offered on campus  
? Programmes available for colleges to choose from  
	1.2.2  	Give details on the following provisions with reference to academic flexibility    
a. Core / Elective options  
b. Enrichment courses  
c. Courses offered in modular form  
d. Credit accumulation and transfer facility  
e. Lateral and vertical mobility within and across programmes, courses and disciplines  
1.2.3  Does the university have an explicit policy and strategy for attracting international students? 
1.2.4 Have any courses been developed targeting international students? If so, how successful have they been? If ‘no’, explain the impediments.    
1.2.5  Does the university facilitate dual degree and twinning programmes? If yes, give details. 
1.2.6  Does the university offer self-financing programmes? If yes, list them and indicate if policies regarding admission, fee structure, teacher qualification and salary are at par with the aided programmes?   
1.2.7  Does the university provide the flexibility of bringing together the conventional face-to-face mode and the distance mode of education and allow students to choose and combine the courses they are interested in? If ‘yes,’ give operational details. 
1.2.8  Has the university adopted the Choice Based Credit System (CBCS)? If yes, for how many programmes? What efforts have been made by the university to encourage the introduction of CBCS in its affiliated colleges?  
	1.2.9 	What percentage of programmes offered by the university follow:  
? Annual system 
? Semester system 
? Trimester system  
1.2.10 How does the university promote inter-disciplinary programmes? Name a few programmes and comment on their outcome.  
 
	1.3  	Curriculum Enrichment  
1.3.1 How often is the curriculum of the university reviewed and upgraded for making it socially relevant and/or job oriented / knowledge intensive and meeting the emerging needs of students and other stakeholders? 
1.3.2  During the last four years, how many new programmes at UG and PG levels were introduced? Give details. 
? Inter-disciplinary 
? programmes in emerging areas   
1.3.3   What are the strategies adopted for the revision of the existing programmes? What percentage of courses underwent a syllabus revision?   
1.3.4  What are the value-added courses offered by the university and how does the university ensure that all students have access to them? 
1.3.5 	Has the university introduced any higher order skill development programmes in consonance with the national requirements as outlined by the National Skills Development Corporation and other agencies?   
 
	1.4  	Feedback System  
1.4.1 Does the university have a formal mechanism to obtain feedback from students regarding the curriculum and how is it made use of?     
1.4.2 Does the university elicit feedback on the curriculum from national and international faculty? If yes, specify a few methods such as conducting webinars, workshops, online discussions, etc. and its impact.    
1.4.3 Specify the mechanism through which affiliated institutions give feedback on curriculum enrichment and the extent to which it is made use of. 
1.4.4 What are the quality sustenance and quality enhancement measures undertaken by the university in ensuring the effective development of the curricula? 
Any other information regarding Curricular Aspects which the university would like to include.     
 
CRITERION II: TEACHING-LEARNING AND EVALUATION 
	2.1  	Student Enrolment and Profile  
2.1.1  	How does the university ensure publicity and transparency in the admission process?   
2.1.2   Explain in detail the process of admission put in place by the university. List the criteria for admission: (e.g.: (i) merit, (ii) merit with entrance test, (iii) merit,  entrance test and interview, (iv) common entrance test conducted by state agencies and national agencies (v) other criteria followed by the university (please specify).       
2.1.3   Provide details of admission process in the affiliated colleges and the university’s role in monitoring the same.     
2.1.4 Does the university have a mechanism to review its admission process and student profile annually? If yes, what is the outcome of such an analysis and 
how has it contributed to the improvement of the process?  
2.1.5  What are the strategies adopted to increase / improve access for students belonging to the following categories:  
? SC/ST 
? OBC 
? Women  
? Persons with varied disabilities   
? Economically weaker sections  
? Outstanding achievers in sports and other extracurricular activities  
2.1.6    Number of students admitted in university departments in the last four academic years:  
 
Categories Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Male  Female Male  Female Male  Female Male  Female SC         ST         OBC          General          Others         2.1.7  Has the university conducted any analysis of demand ratio for the various programmes of the university departments and affiliated colleges? If so, highlight the significant trends explaining the reasons for increase / decrease.  
Programmes  Number of applications Number of students admitted Demand 
Ratio UG    PG    Integrated Masters    M.Phil.     Ph.D.     Integrated Ph.D.    Certificate     Diploma     PG Diploma     Any other (please specify)    2.1.8  Were any programmes  discontinued/staggered by the university in the last four years? If yes, please specify the reasons. 
 
	2.2  	Catering to Student Diversity   
2.2.1 Does the university organize orientation / induction programme for freshers? If yes, give details such as the duration, issues covered, experts involved and mechanism for using the feedback in subsequent years.    
2.2.2 Does the university have a mechanism through which the “differential requirements of the student population” are analysed after admission and before the commencement of classes? If so, how are the key issues identified and addressed? 
2.2.3 Does the university offer bridge / remedial / add-on courses? If yes, how are they structured into the time table? Give details of the courses offered, department-wise/faculty-wise?  
2.2.4 Has the university conducted any study on the academic growth of students from disadvantaged sections of society, economically disadvantaged, physically handicapped, slow learners, etc.? If yes, what are the main findings?  
2.2.5 How does the university identify and respond to the learning needs of advanced learners? 
 
	2.3  	Teaching-Learning Process  
2.3.1  How does the university plan and organise the teaching, learning and evaluation schedules (academic calendar, teaching plan, evaluation blue print, etc.)?     
2.3.2 Does the university provide course outlines and course schedules prior to the commencement of the academic session? If yes, how is the effectiveness of the process ensured?  
2.3.3   Does the university face any challenges in completing the curriculum within the stipulated time frame and calendar? If yes, elaborate on the challenges encountered and the institutional measures to overcome these.  
2.3.4 How is learning made student-centric?  Give a list of participatory learning activities adopted by the faculty that contributes to holistic development and improved student learning, besides facilitating life-long learning and knowledge management. 
2.3.5 What is the university’s policy on inviting experts / people of eminence to deliver lectures and/or organize seminars for students?   
2.3.6  	Does the university formally encourage blended learning by using e-learning resources?      
2.3.7 What are the technologies and facilities such as virtual laboratories,  e-learning, open educational resources and mobile education used by the faculty for effective teaching?  
2.3.8 Is there any designated group among the faculty to monitor the trends and issues regarding developments in Open Source Community and integrate its benefits in the university’s educational processes?    
2.3.9 What steps has the university taken to orient traditional classrooms into 24x7 learning places?  
2.3.10  Is there a provision for the services of counsellors / mentors/ advisors for each class or group of students for academic, personal and psycho-social guidance? If yes, give details of the process and the number of students who have benefitted. 
2.3.11  Were any innovative teaching approaches/methods/practices adopted/put to use by the faculty during the last four years? If yes, did they improve learning? What were the methods used to evaluate the impact of such practices? What are the efforts made by the institution in giving the faculty due recognition for innovation in teaching? 
2.3.12 How does the university create a culture of instilling and nurturing creativity and scientific temper among the learners?   
2.3.13   Does the university consider student projects mandatory in the learning programme? If yes, for how many programmes have they been (percentage of total) made mandatory?   
? Number of projects executed within the university  
? Names of external institutions associated with the university for student project work   
? Role of faculty in facilitating such projects     
2.3.14   Does the university have a well qualified pool of human resource to meet the requirements of the curriculum? If there is a shortfall, how is it supplemented?  
2.3.15 How are the faculty enabled to prepare computer-aided teaching/ learning materials? What are the facilities available in the university for such efforts? 
2.3.16   Does the university have a mechanism for the evaluation of teachers by the students / alumni? If yes, how is the evaluation feedback used to improve the quality of the teaching-learning process? 
 
	2.4  	Teacher Quality   
2.4.1  How does the university plan and manage its human resources to meet the changing requirements of the curriculum? 
	2.4.2 	Furnish details of the faculty  
 
Highest Qualification Professors Associate Professors Assistant Professors Total Male   Female Male   Female Male   Female  Permanent teachers D.Sc./D.Litt.          Ph.D.          M.Phil.          PG          Temporary teachers Ph.D.         M.Phil.          PG          Part-time teachers Ph.D.          M.Phil.          PG          2.4.3 	Does the university encourage diversity in its faculty recruitment? Provide the following details (department / school-wise).   
Department 
/ School   % of faculty 
from the same university % of faculty from other 
universities 
within the 
State % of faculty from 
universities 
outside the 
State % of faculty from  
other countries                       
2.4.4  How does the university ensure that qualified faculty are appointed for new programmes / emerging areas of study (Bio-technology, Bio-informatics, Material Science, Nanotechnology, Comparative Media Studies, Diaspora Studies, Forensic Computing, Educational Leadership, etc.)? How many faculty members were appointed to teach new programmes during the last four years?  
2.4.5  How many Emeritus / Adjunct Faculty / Visiting Professors are on the rolls of the university?  
2.4.6  What policies/systems are in place to academically recharge and rejuvenate teachers (e.g. providing research grants, study leave, nomination to national/international conferences/seminars, in-service training, organizing national/international conferences etc.)?  
2.4.7  How many faculty received awards / recognitions for excellence in teaching at the state, national and international level during the last four years? 
2.4.8  How many faculty underwent staff development programmes during the last four years (add any other programme if necessary)? 
Academic Staff Development Programmes Number of faculty Refresher courses  HRD programmes   Orientation programmes  Staff training conducted by the university  Staff training conducted by other institutions   Summer / Winter schools, workshops, etc.   	2.4.9  	What percentage of the faculty have    
? been invited as resource persons in Workshops / Seminars / Conferences organized by external professional agencies?  
? participated in external Workshops / Seminars / Conferences recognized by national/ international professional bodies?   
? presented papers in Workshops / Seminars / Conferences conducted or recognized by professional agencies?   
? teaching experience in other universities / national institutions and other institutions?   
? industrial engagement?  
? international experience in teaching?   
2.4.10  How often does the university organize academic development programmes (e.g.: curriculum development, teaching-learning methods, examination reforms, content / knowledge management, etc.)  for its faculty aimed at enriching the teaching-learning process?  
	2.4.11 	Does the university have a mechanism to encourage  
? Mobility of faculty between universities for teaching? 
? Faculty exchange programmes with national and international bodies?  
If yes, how have these schemes helped in enriching the quality of the faculty?  
 
	2.5  	Evaluation Process and Reforms 
2.5.1 How does the university ensure that all the stakeholders are aware of the evaluation processes that are in place?  
2.5.2 What are the important examination reforms initiated by the university and to what extent have they been implemented in the university departments and affiliated colleges? Cite a few examples which have positively impacted the examination management system 
2.5.3 What is the average time taken by the university for declaration of examination results? In case of delay, what measures have been taken to address them? Indicate the mode / media adopted by the university for the publication of examination results ( e.g. website, SMS, email, etc.).   
2.5.4 	How does the university ensure transparency in the evaluation process? What are the rigorous features introduced by the university to ensure confidentiality?  
2.5.5 	Does the university have an integrated examination platform for the following processes?   
? Pre-examination processes – Time table generation, OMR, student list generation, invigilators, squads, attendance sheet, online payment gateway, etc.      
? Examination process – Examination material management, logistics, etc.  
? Post-examination process – Attendance capture, OMR-based exam result, auto processing, generic result processing, certification, etc.  
	2.5.6 	Has the university introduced any reforms in its Ph.D. evaluation process?  
2.5.7 Has the university created any provision for including the name of the college in the degree certificate?  
2.5.8 	What is the mechanism for redressal of grievances with reference to examinations?  
2.5.9 What efforts have been made by the university to streamline the operations at the Office of the Controller of Examinations? Mention any significant efforts which have improved the process and functioning of the examination division/section. 
 
	2.6.  	Student Performance and Learning Outcomes 
2.6.1     Has the university articulated its graduate attributes? If so, how does it facilitate and monitor its implementation and outcome?  
2.6.2 Does the university have clearly stated learning outcomes for its academic programmes/departments? If yes, give details on how the students and staff are made aware of these? 
2.6.3 	How are the university’s teaching, learning and assessment strategies structured to facilitate the achievement of the intended learning outcomes? 
2.6.4   How does the university collect and analyse data on student learning outcomes and use it to overcome the barriers to learning?  
2.6.5 What are the new technologies deployed by the university in enhancing student learning and evaluation and how does it seek to meet fresh/ future challenges? 
Any other information regarding Teaching, Learning and Evaluation which the university would like to include.     
 
CRITERION III: RESEARCH, CONSULTANCY AND EXTENSION 
	3.1  	Promotion of Research 
3.1.1 	Does the university have a Research Committee to monitor and address issues related to research? If yes, what is its composition? Mention a few recommendations which have been implemented and their impact.   
3.1.2  What is the policy of the university to promote research in its affiliated / constituent colleges? 
3.1.3   What are the proactive mechanisms adopted by the university to facilitate the smooth implementation of research schemes/projects?  
? advancing funds for sanctioned projects 
? providing seed money 
? simplification of procedures related to sanctions / purchases to be made by the investigators  
? autonomy to the principal investigator/coordinator for utilizing overhead charges 
? timely release of grants 
? timely auditing  
? submission of utilization certificate to the funding authorities  
	3.1.4 	How is interdisciplinary research promoted?  
? between/among different departments /schools of the university and  ? collaboration with national/international institutes / industries.  
3.1.5   Give details of workshops/ training programmes/ sensitization programmes conducted by the university to promote a research culture on campus. 
3.1.6  How does the university facilitate researchers of eminence to visit the campus as adjunct professors? What is the impact of such efforts on the research activities of the university?   
3.1.7   What percentage of the total budget is earmarked for research? Give details of heads of expenditure, financial allocation and actual utilization.    
3.1.8   In its budget, does the university earmark funds for promoting research in its affiliated colleges? If yes, provide details.  
3.1.9 	Does the university encourage research by awarding Post Doctoral Fellowships/Research Associateships? If yes, provide details like number of students registered, funding by the university and other sources. 
3.1.10   What percentage of faculty have utilized the sabbatical leave for pursuit of higher research in premier institutions within the country and abroad? How does the university monitor the output of these scholars?   
3.1.11  Provide details of national and international conferences organized by the university highlighting the names of eminent scientists/scholars who participated in these events.   
 
	3.2 	 Resource Mobilization for Research  
3.2.1    What are the financial provisions made in the university budget for supporting students’ research projects?  
3.2.2 Has the university taken any special efforts to encourage its faculty to file for patents? If so, how many have been registered and accepted?  
	3.2.3  	Provide the following details of ongoing research projects of faculty: 
 
  Year wise Number  Name of 
the project Name of the funding agency Total grant received A. University awarded projects Minor projects      Major projects       B. Other agencies - national and international (specify) Minor projects      Major projects        
3.2.4  Does the university have any projects sponsored by the industry / corporate houses? If yes, give details such as the name of the project, funding agency and grants received.    
3.2.5 How many departments of the university have been recognized for their research activities by national / international agencies (UGC-SAP, CAS; Department with Potential for Excellence; DST-FIST; DBT, ICSSR, ICHR, ICPR, etc.) and what is the quantum of assistance received? Mention any two significant outcomes or breakthroughs achieved by this recognition.  
	3.2.6 	List details of   
a. research projects completed and grants received during the last four years (funded by National/International agencies).    
b. Inter-institutional collaborative projects and grants received                             
i) All India collaboration    
ii) International      
 
	3.3 	Research Facilities  
3.3.1 What efforts have been made by the university to improve its infrastructure requirements to facilitate research? What strategies have been evolved to meet the needs of researchers in emerging disciplines? 
3.3.2 Does the university have an Information Resource Centre to cater to the needs of researchers? If yes, provide details of the facility. 
3.3.3 Does the university have a University Science Instrumentation Centre (USIC)? If yes, have the facilities been made available to research scholars? What is the funding allotted to USIC?   
3.3.4 Does the university provide residential facilities (with computer and internet 

facilities) for research scholars, post-doctoral fellows, research associates, summer fellows of various academies and visiting scientists 
(national/international)?  
3.3.5 Does the university have a specialized research centre/ workstation oncampus and off-campus to address the special challenges of research programmes? 
3.3.6 Does 	the 	university 	have 	centres 	of 	national 	and 	international recognition/repute? Give a brief description of how these facilities are made use of by researchers from other laboratories.  
 
3.4  	Research Publications and Awards    
3.4.1 Does the university publish any research journal(s)? If yes, indicate the composition of the editorial board, editorial policies and state whether it/they is/are listed in any international database. 
3.4.2 Give details of publications by the faculty:  
? Number of papers published in peer reviewed journals (national / international)  
? Monographs 
? Chapters in Books 
? Books edited  
? Books with ISBN with details of publishers 
? Number listed in International Database (For e.g. Web of Science, Scopus, Humanities International Complete, EBSCO host, etc.) 
? Citation Index – range / average  
? SNIP 
? SJR 
? Impact Factor – range / average   
? h-index  
3.4.3 	Give details of  
? faculty serving on the editorial boards of national and international journals  
? faculty  serving as members of  steering  committees of international conferences  recognized by reputed organizations / societies 
3.4.4 	Provide details of  
research awards received by the faculty and students    
national and international recognition received by the faculty from reputed professional bodies and agencies  
3.4.5  Indicate the average number of successful M.Phil. and Ph.D. scholars guided per faculty during the last four years. Does the university participate in Shodhganga by depositing the Ph.D. theses with INFLIBNET for electronic dissemination through open access?      
3.4.6 What is the official policy of the university to check malpractices and plagiarism in research? Mention the number of plagiarism cases reported and action taken.   
3.4.7 Does the university promote interdisciplinary research? If yes, how many interdepartmental / interdisciplinary research projects have been undertaken and mention the number of departments involved in such endeavours?   
3.4.8 	 Has the university instituted any research awards? If yes, list the awards. 
3.4.9 What are the incentives given to the faculty for receiving state, national and international recognition for research contributions? 
 
3.5  	Consultancy    
3.5.1  What is the official policy of the university for structured consultancy? List a few important consultancies undertaken by the university during the last four years.  
3.5.2 Does the university have a university-industry cell? If yes, what is its scope and range of activities? 
3.5.3  What is the mode of publicizing the expertise of the university for consultancy services? Which are the departments from whom consultancy has been sought? 
3.5.4 How does the university utilize the expertise of its faculty with regard to consultancy services?  
3.5.5  List the broad areas of consultancy services provided by the university and the revenue generated during the last four years. 
 
3.6  	Extension Activities and Institutional Social Responsibility (ISR)  
3.6.1  How does the university sensitize its faculty and students on its Institutional Social Responsibilities? List the social outreach programmes which have created an impact on students’ campus experience during the last four years.   
3.6.2   How does the university promote university-neighborhood network and student engagement, contributing to the holistic development of students and sustained community development? 
3.6.3   How does the university promote the participation of the students and faculty in extension activities including participation in NSS, NCC, YRC and other National/ International programmes?  
3.6.4    Give details of social surveys, research or extension work, if any, undertaken 
by the university to ensure social justice and empower the  underprivileged and the most vulnerable sections of society? 
3.6.5 Does the university have a mechanism to track the students’ involvement in various social movements / activities which promote citizenship roles? 
3.6.6  Bearing in mind the objectives and expected outcomes of the extension activities organized by the university, how did they complement students’ academic learning experience? Specify the values inculcated and skills learnt.  
3.6.7   How does the university ensure the involvement of the community in its outreach activities and contribute to community development? Give details of the initiatives of the university which have encouraged community participation in its activities.      
3.6.8    Give details of awards received by the institution for extension activities and/contributions to social/community development during the last four years. 
  
3.7 	Collaboration  
3.7.1   How has the university’s collaboration with other agencies impacted the visibility, identity and diversity of activities on campus? To what extent has the university benefitted academically and financially because of collaborations?   
3.7.2 	Mention specific examples of how these linkages promote   
? Curriculum development 
? Internship 
? On-the-job training   
? Faculty exchange and development 
? Research 
Publication 
Consultancy 
? Extension 
? Student placement 
? Any other (please specify) 
3.7.3 	Has 	the 	university 	signed 	any 	MoUs 	with 	institutions 	of national/international importance/other universities/ industries/corporate houses etc.? If yes, how have they enhanced the research and development activities of the university?           
3.7.4 Have the university-industry interactions resulted in the establishment / creation of highly specialized laboratories / facilities?    
Any other information regarding Research, Consultancy and Extension, which the university would like to include.     
 
CRITERION IV: INFRASTRUCTURE AND LEARNING RESOURCES 
4.1  	Physical Facilities 
4.1.1  How does the university plan and ensure adequate availability of physical infrastructure and ensure its optimal utilization? 
4.1.2  Does the university have a policy for the creation and enhancement of infrastructure in order to promote a good teaching-learning environment? If yes, mention a few recent initiatives.      
4.1.3  How does the university create a conducive physical ambience for the faculty in terms of adequate research laboratories, computing facilities and allied services?     
4.1.4  Has the university provided all departments with facilities like office room, common room and separate rest rooms for women students and staff?   
4.1.5  	How does the university ensure that the infrastructure facilities are disabledfriendly? 
4.1.6  How does the university cater to the requirements of residential students? Give details of  
? Capacity of the hostels and occupancy (to be given separately for men and women) 
? Recreational facilities in hostel/s like gymnasium, yoga centre, etc. 
? Broadband connectivity / wi-fi facility in hostels.  
4.1.7 Does the university offer medical facilities for its students and teaching and non-teaching staff living on campus?   
4.1.8 	What special facilities are available on campus to promote students’ interest in sports and cultural events/activities? 
 
4.2 	Library as a Learning Resource 
4.2.1 Does the library have an Advisory Committee? Specify the composition of the committee. What significant initiatives have been taken by the committee to render the library student/user friendly? 
4.2.2 	Provide details of the following:   
? Total area of the library (in Sq. Mts.) 
? Total seating capacity 
? Working hours (on working days, on holidays, before examination, during examination, during vacation) 
? Layout of the library (individual reading carrels, lounge area for browsing and relaxed reading, IT zone for accessing e-resources)  
? Clear and prominent display of floor plan; adequate sign boards; fire alarm; access to differently-abled users and mode of access to collection  
4.2.3 	Give details of the library holdings:  
a) Print (books, journals, back volumes and theses) 
b) Average number of books added during the last three years 
c) Non Print (Microfiche, AV) 
d) Electronic (e-books, e-journals) 
e) Special collections (e.g. text books, reference books, standards, patents)      f) Book banks 
g) Question banks  
4.2.4 	What tools does the library deploy to provide access to the collection?  
? OPAC  
? Electronic Resource Management package for e-journals 
? Federated searching tools to search articles in multiple databases  
? Library Website                                                               
? In-house/remote access to e-publications                     
4.2.5 	To what extent is ICT deployed in the library? Give details with regard to   
Library automation                                            
Total number of computers for general access         
? Total numbers of printers for general access     
? Internet band width speed     ? 2mbps  ? 10 mbps  ? 1 GB  
? Institutional Repository   
? Content management system for  e-learning 
? Participation in resource sharing networks/consortia (like INFLIBNET)  
4.2.6 	Provide details (per month) with regard to  ? Average number of walk-ins  
? Average number of books issued/returned 
? Ratio of library books to students  enrolled 
? Average number of books added during the last four years 
? Average number of login to OPAC  
? Average number of login to e-resources 
? Average number of e-resources downloaded/printed 
? Number of IT (Information Technology) literacy trainings organized  
 4.2.7 	Give details of specialized services provided by the library with regard to 
? Manuscripts  
? Reference           
? Reprography / scanning  
? Inter-library Loan Service  
? Information Deployment and Notification  
? OPACS    
? Internet Access 
? Downloads 
? Printouts 
? Reading list/ Bibliography compilation 
? In-house/remote access to e-resources 
? User Orientation 
? Assistance in searching Databases  ? INFLIBNET/IUC facilities 
4.2.8 Provide details of the annual library budget and the amount spent for purchasing new books and journals.  
4.2.9 What initiatives has the university taken to make the library a ‘happening place’ on campus?     

4.2.10 What are the strategies used by the library to collect feedback from its users? How is the feedback analysed and used for the improvement of the library services?  
4.2.11  List the efforts made towards the infrastructural development of the library in the last four years.  
    
4.3 	IT Infrastructure   
4.3.1  	Does the university have a comprehensive IT policy with regard to  
• IT Service Management 
• Information Security 
• Network Security 
• Risk Management  
• Software Asset Management  
• Open Source Resources 
• Green Computing   
4.3.2  	Give details of the university’s computing facilities i.e., hardware and software.  
• Number of systems with individual configurations  
• Computer-student ratio 
• Dedicated computing facilities 
• Wifi facility  
• LAN facility 
• Proprietary software  
• Number of nodes/ computers with internet facility 
• Any other (please specify) 
4.3.3  What are the institutional plans and strategies for deploying and upgrading the IT infrastructure and associated facilities?  
4.3.4  Give details on access to on-line teaching and learning resources and other knowledge and information database/packages provided to the staff and students for quality teaching, learning and research. 
4.3.5 What are the new technologies deployed by the university in enhancing student learning and evaluation during the last four years and how do they meet new / future challenges? 
4.3.6   What are the IT facilities available to individual teachers for effective teaching and quality research? 
4.3.7     Give details of ICT-enabled classrooms/learning spaces available within the university? How are they utilized for enhancing the quality of teaching and learning? 
4.3.8 How are the faculty assisted in preparing computer- aided teaching-learning materials? What are the facilities available in the university for such initiatives?   
4.3.9   	How are the computers and their accessories maintained?  
4.3.10 Does the university avail of the National Knowledge Network connectivity? If so, what are the services availed of?   
4.3.11  Does the university avail of web resources such as Wikipedia, dictionary and other education enhancing resources? What are its policies in this regard? 
4.3.12 Provide details on the provision made in the annual budget for the update, deployment and maintenance of computers in the university. 
4.3.13  What plans have been envisioned for the gradual transfer of teaching and learning from closed university information network to open environment?  
 
4.4 	Maintenance of Campus Facilities  
4.4.1 Does the university have an estate office / designated officer for overseeing the maintenance of buildings, class-rooms and laboratories? If yes, mention a few campus specific initiatives undertaken to improve the physical ambience.  
4.4.2  	How are the infrastructure facilities, services and equipments maintained? 
Give details.            
Any other information regarding Infrastructure and Learning Resources which the university would like to include.     
 
CRITERION V: STUDENT SUPPORT AND PROGRESSION  
5.1 	Student Mentoring and Support 
5.1.1 Does the university have a system for student support and mentoring? If yes, what are its structural and functional characteristics?  
5.1.2 Apart from classroom interaction, what are the provisions available for academic mentoring? 
5.1.3 Does the university have any personal enhancement and development schemes such as career counselling, soft skill development, career-pathidentification, and orientation to well-being for its students? Give details of such schemes. 
5.1.4 Does the university provide assistance to students for obtaining educational loans from banks and other financial institutions? 
5.1.5 Does the university publish its updated prospectus and handbook annually? If yes, what are the main issues / activities / information included / provided to students through these documents? Is there a provision for online access?   
5.1.6 Specify the type and number of university scholarships / freeships given to the students during the last four years. Was financial aid given to them on time? Give details (in a tabular form) for the following categories: UG/PG/M.Phil/Ph.D./Diploma/others (please specify).  
5.1.7 	What percentage of students receive financial assistance from state government, central government and other national agencies (Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana (KVPY), SN Bose Fellow, etc.)?  
5.1.8 Does the university have an International Student Cell to attract foreign students and cater to their needs? 
5.1.9 Does the university provide assistance to students for obtaining educational loans from banks and other financial institutions? 
5.1.10 What types of support services are available for 
? overseas students 
? physically challenged / differently-abled students 
? SC/ST, OBC and economically weaker sections 
? students participating in various competitions/conferences in India and abroad 
? health centre, health insurance etc.  
? skill development (spoken English, computer literacy, etc.)  
? performance enhancement for slow learners 
? exposure of students to other institutions of higher learning/ corporates/business houses, etc.  
? publication of student magazines  
5.1.11 Does the university provide guidance and/or conduct coaching classes for students appearing for Civil Services, Defense Services, NET/SET and any 
other competitive examinations? If yes, what is the outcome?  
5.1.12 Mention the policies of the university for enhancing student participation in sports and extracurricular activities through strategies / schemes such as  
? additional academic support and academic flexibility in examinations  
? special dietary requirements, sports uniform and materials  ? any other (please specify)   
5.1.13 Does the university have an institutionalized mechanism for students’ placement? What are the services provided to help students identify job opportunities, prepare themselves for interview, and develop entrepreneurship skills? 
5.1.14 Give the number of students selected during campus interviews by different employers (list the employers and the number of companies who visited the campus during the last four years).  
5.1.15 Does the university have a registered Alumni Association? If yes, what are its activities and contributions to the development of the university?   
5.1.16 Does the university have a student grievance redressal cell?  Give details of the nature of grievances reported. How were they redressed?   
5.1.17 Does the university promote a gender-sensitive environment by (i) conducting gender related programmes (ii) establishing a cell and mechanism to deal with issues related to sexual harassment? Give details.           
5.1.18 Is there an anti-ragging committee? How many instances, if any, have been reported during the last four years and what action has been taken in these cases? 
5.1.19 How does the university elicit the cooperation of all its stakeholders to ensure the overall development of its students?  
5.1.19 How does the university ensure the participation of women students in intra- and inter-institutional sports competitions and cultural activities? Provide details of sports and cultural activities where such efforts were made.  
 
5.2  	Student Progression  
5.2.1 What is the student strength of the university for the current academic year? Analyse the Programme-wise data and provide the trends for the last four years.   
 
Student Progression % UG to PG*  PG to M.Phil.*   PG to Ph.D.    Ph.D. to Post-Doctoral    Employed  
• Campus selection  
• Other than campus recruitment    
5.2.2 What is the programme-wise completion rate during the time span stipulated by the university? 
5.2.3 What is the number and percentage of students who appeared/qualified in examinations like UGC-CSIR-NET, UGC-NET, SLET, ATE / CAT / GRE / TOFEL / GMAT / Central / State services, Defense, Civil Services, etc.?  
5.2.4 	Provide category-wise details regarding the number of Ph.D./D.Litt./D.Sc. 
theses submitted/ accepted/ resubmitted/ rejected in the last four years. 
 
5.3  	Student Participation and Activities   
5.3.1 List the range of sports, cultural and extracurricular activities available to students. Furnish the programme calendar and provide details of students’ participation.   
5.3.2 Give details of the achievements of students in co-curricular, extracurricular and cultural activities at different levels: University / State / Zonal / National / International, etc. during the last four years.  
5.3.3     Does the university conduct special drives / campaigns for students to promote heritage consciousness?      
5.3.4 How does the university involve and encourage its students to publish   materials like catalogues, wall magazines, college magazine, and other material? List the major publications/ materials brought out by the students during the last four academic sessions. 
5.3.5 Does the university have a Student Council or any other similar body? Give details on its constitution, activities and funding.  
5.3.6 Give details of various academic and administrative bodies that have student representatives on them. Also provide details of their activities. 
Any other information regarding Student Support and Progression which the university would like to include.     
  
CRITERION VI: GOVERNANCE, LEADERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT     
6.1  	Institutional Vision and Leadership  
6.1.1  	State the vision and the mission of the university.  
6.1.2 Does  the  mission  statement  define  the  institution’s  distinctive characteristics in terms of addressing the needs of   the society, the students  it  seeks  to  serve,  the institution’s  tradition  and  value orientations, its vision for the future, etc.?  
6.1.3   	How is the leadership involved  
? in ensuring the organization’s management system development, implementation and continuous improvement?  
? in interacting with its stakeholders? 
? in reinforcing a culture of excellence? 
? in identifying organizational needs and striving to fulfill them? 
6.1.4     Were any of the top leadership positions of the university vacant for more than a year? If so, state the reasons. 
6.1.5 Does the university ensure that all positions in its various statutory bodies are filled and meetings conducted regularly?  
6.1.6 	 Does the university promote a culture of participative management? If yes, indicate the levels of participative management. 
6.1.7      Give details of the academic and administrative leadership provided by the university to its affiliated colleges and the support and encouragement given to them to become autonomous. 
6.1.8 Have any provisions been incorporated / introduced in the University Act and Statutes to provide for conferment of degrees by autonomous colleges?     
6.1.9      How does the university groom leadership at various levels? Give details.       
6.1.10 	Has the university evolved a knowledge management strategy?  If yes, give details.  
6.1.11 	How are the following values reflected the functioning of the university? 
? Contributing to national development  
? Fostering global competencies among students  
? Inculcating a sound value system among students 
? Promoting use of technology 
? Quest for excellence 
 
6.2  	Strategy Development and Deployment  
6.2.1  Does the university have a perspective plan for development? If yes, what aspects are considered in the development of policies and strategies?  
? Vision and mission  
? Teaching and learning 
? Research and development 
? Community engagement  
? Human resource planning and development  
? Industry interaction  ? Internationalisation 
6.2.2 	Describe the university’s internal organizational structure and decision making processes and their effectiveness.   
6.2.3    Does the university have a formal policy to ensure quality? How is it designed, driven, deployed and reviewed?     
6.2.4 	Does the university encourage its academic departments to function independently and autonomously and how does it ensure accountability?  
6.2.5   During the last four years, have there been any instances of court cases filed by and against the institute? What were the critical issues and verdicts of the courts on these issues?     
6.2.6 How does the university ensure that grievances / complaints are promptly attended to and resolved effectively? Is there a mechanism to analyse the nature of grievances for promoting better stakeholder-relationship?   
6.2.7 Does the university have a mechanism for analyzing student feedback on institutional performance? If yes, what was the institutional response?   
6.2.8  	Does the university conduct performance audit of the various departments? 
6.2.9 What mechanisms have been evolved by the university to identify the developmental needs of its affiliated institutions?  
6.2.10  Does the university have a vibrant College Development Council (CDC) / Board of College and University Development (BCUD)? If yes, detail its structure, functions and achievements.  
 
 
 
6.3  	Faculty Empowerment Strategies   
6.3.1 What efforts have been made to enhance the professional development of teaching and non-teaching staff? 
6.3.2 What is the outcome of the review of various appraisal methods used by the university? List the important decisions. 
6.3.3    What are the welfare schemes available for teaching and non-teaching staff? What percentage of staff have benefitted from these schemes in the last four years? Give details.   
6.3.4 What are the measures taken by the university for attracting and retaining eminent faculty?   
6.3.5 Has the university conducted a gender audit during the last four years? If yes, mention a few salient findings.  
6.3.6 	Does the university conduct any gender sensitization programmes for its faculty? 
6.3.7  What is the impact of the University’s Academic Staff College Programmes in enhancing the competencies of the university faculty?   
 
6.4  	Financial Management and Resource Mobilization  
6.4.1  What is the institutional mechanism available to monitor the effective and efficient use of financial resources?  
6.4.2 	Does the university have a mechanism for internal and external audit? Give details.  
6.4.3 Are the institution’s accounts audited regularly? Have there been any major audit objections, if so, how were they addressed? 
6.4.4 Provide the audited income and expenditure statement of academic and administrative activities of the last four years.   
6.4.5      Narrate the efforts taken by the university for resource mobilization.   
6.4.6 	Is there any provision for the university to create a corpus fund? If yes, give details. 
 
6.5        Internal Quality Assurance System   
6.5.1  	Does the university conduct an academic audit of its departments? If yes, give details. 
6.5.2  	Based on the recommendations of the academic audit, what specific measures have been taken by the university to improve teaching, learning and evaluation?  
6.5.3   Is there a central body within the university to continuously review the teaching learning process? Give details of its structure, methodologies of operations   and outcome?  
6.5.4 How has IQAC contributed to institutionalizing quality assurance strategies and processes?   
6.5.5 How many decisions of the IQAC have been placed before the statutory authorities of the university for implementation?      
6.5.6 Does the IQAC have external members on its committees? If so, mention any significant contribution made by such members.      
6.5.7 Has the IQAC conducted any study on the incremental academic growth of students from disadvantaged sections of society?  
6.5.8 What policies are in place for the periodic review of administrative and academic departments, subject areas, research centres, etc.? 
Any other information regarding Governance, Leadership and Management which the university would like to include.     
 
CRITERIA VII: INNOVATIONS AND BEST PRACTICES   
7.1 	Environment Consciousness 
7.1.1 	Does the university conduct a Green Audit of its campus?    
7.1.2  	What are the initiatives taken by the university to make the campus ecofriendly? 
? Energy conservation  
? Use of renewable energy  
? Water harvesting  
? Check dam construction  
? Efforts for Carbon neutrality  
? Plantation  
? Hazardous waste management  
? e-waste management  
? any other (please specify) 
 
 
7.2 	Innovations  
7.2.1 Give details of innovations introduced during the last four years which have created a positive impact on the functioning of the university.     
 
7.3 	Best Practices  
7.3.1 Give details of any two best practices which have contributed to better academic and administrative functioning of the university.  
 
Format for Presentation of Best Practices 
1. Title of the Practice  
         This title should capture the keywords that describe the practice. 
2. Objectives of the Practice  
        What are the objectives / intended outcomes of this “best practice” and what are the underlying principles or concepts of this practice (in about 100 words)? 
3. The Context  
       What were the contextual features or challenging issues that needed to be addressed in designing and implementing this practice (in about 150 words)?  
4. The Practice  
         Describe the practice and its uniqueness in the context of India higher education. What were the constraints / limitations, if any, faced (in about 400 words)?  
5. Evidence of Success  
        Provide evidence of success such as performance against targets and benchmarks, review results. What do these results indicate?  Describe in about 200 words. 
6. Problems Encountered and Resources Required  
         Please identify the problems encountered and resources required to implement the practice (in about 150 words). 
7. Notes  
         Optional. Please add any other information that may be relevant for adopting/ implementing the Best Practice in other institutions (in about 150 words).  
Any other information regarding Innovations and Best Practices which the university would like to include.     
 
Evaluative Report of the Department   
 
1. Name of the Department   
2. Year of establishment 
3. Is the Department part of a School/Faculty of the university? 
4. Names of programmes offered (UG, PG, M.Phil., Ph.D., Integrated Masters; 
Integrated Ph.D., D.Sc., D.Litt., etc.)  
5. Interdisciplinary programmes and departments involved 
6. Courses in collaboration with other universities, industries, foreign institutions, etc.   
7. Details of programmes discontinued, if any, with reasons  
8. Examination System: Annual/Semester/Trimester/Choice Based Credit System  
9. Participation of the department in the courses offered by other departments 
10. Number of teaching posts sanctioned, filled and actual (Professors/Associate Professors/Asst. Professors/others) 
 Sanctioned  Filled Actual (including 
CAS & MPS) Professor     Associate Professors    Asst. Professors    Others      
11. Faculty profile with name, qualification, designation, area of specialization, experience and research under guidance  
Name 
 Qualification Designation Specialization No. of 
Years of 
Experience No. of 
Ph.D./M.Phil. 
students 
guided for the last 4 years        
12. List of senior Visiting Fellows, adjunct faculty, emeritus professors 
13. Percentage of classes taken by temporary faculty – programme-wise information  
14. Programme-wise Student Teacher Ratio 
15. Number of academic support staff (technical) and administrative staff: sanctioned,  filled and actual 
16. Research thrust areas as recognized by major funding agencies 
17. Number of faculty with ongoing projects from a) national b) international funding agencies and c) Total grants received. Give the names of the funding agencies, project title and grants received project-wise.  
18. Inter-institutional collaborative projects and associated grants received  
a) National collaboration b) International collaboration   
19. Departmental projects funded by DST-FIST; UGC-SAP/CAS, DPE; DBT, ICSSR, AICTE, etc.; total grants received.  
20. Research facility / centre with  
• state recognition 
• national recognition  
• international recognition  
21. Special research laboratories sponsored by / created by industry or corporate bodies  
22. Publications:  
? 	Number of papers published in peer reviewed journals (national / international)  
	? 	Monographs 
	? 	Chapters in Books 
	? 	Edited Books  
	? 	Books with ISBN with details of publishers 
? Number listed in International Database (For e.g. Web of Science, Scopus, Humanities International Complete, Dare Database - International Social Sciences Directory, EBSCO host, etc.) 
	? 	Citation Index – range / average  
	? 	SNIP 
	? 	SJR 
 
	? 	Impact Factor – range / average   
	? 	h-index  
23. Details of patents and income generated   
24. Areas of consultancy and income generated   
25. Faculty selected nationally / internationally to visit other laboratories / institutions / industries in India and abroad  
26. Faculty serving in   
a) National committees b) International committees c) Editorial Boards d) any other (please specify) 
27. Faculty recharging strategies (UGC, ASC, Refresher / orientation programs, workshops, training programs and similar programs).  
28. Student projects  
• percentage of students who have done in-house projects including interdepartmental projects 
• percentage of students doing projects in collaboration with other universities / industry / institute  
29. Awards / recognitions received at the national and international level by  
• Faculty 
• Doctoral / post doctoral fellows  
• Students  
30. Seminars/ Conferences/Workshops organized and the source of funding 
(national / international) with details of outstanding participants, if any. 
31. Code of ethics for research followed by the departments   
32. Student profile programme-wise: 
Name of the 
Programme 
(refer to question no. 4) Applications received Selected Male    Female  Pass percentage  Male     Female                   
33. Diversity of students 
Name of the 
Programme 
(refer to question no. 4) % of students from the same university % of students from other 
universities 
within the 
State % of students from 
universities 
outside the 
State % of students from 
other countries                      34. How many students have cleared Civil Services and Defence Services examinations, NET, SET, GATE and other competitive examinations? Give details category-wise. 
35. Student progression 
Student progression Percentage against enrolled  UG to PG  PG to M.Phil.   PG to Ph.D.    Ph.D. to Post-Doctoral    Employed  
• Campus selection  
• Other than campus recruitment   Entrepreneurs     36. Diversity of staff 
Percentage of  faculty who are graduates    of the same university  from other universities within the State  from universities from other States  from universities outside the country  37. Number of faculty who were awarded M.Phil., Ph.D., D.Sc. and D.Litt. during the assessment period  
38. Present details of departmental infrastructural facilities with regard to a) Library  
b) Internet facilities for staff and students  
c) Total number of class rooms 
d) Class rooms with ICT facility 
e) Students’ laboratories  
f) Research laboratories  
39. List of doctoral, post-doctoral students and Research Associates  
a) from the host institution/university  
b) from other institutions/universities  
40. Number of post graduate students getting financial assistance from the university.  
41. Was any need assessment exercise undertaken before the development of new programme(s)? If so, highlight the methodology.   
42. Does the department obtain feedback from  
a) faculty on curriculum as well as teaching-learning-evaluation? If yes, how does the department utilize the feedback?   
b) students on staff, curriculum and teaching-learning-evaluation and how does the department utilize the feedback?   
c) alumni and employers on the programmes offered and how does the department utilize the feedback?   
43. List the distinguished alumni of the department (maximum 10) 
44. Give details of student enrichment programmes (special lectures / workshops / seminar) involving external experts. 
45. List the teaching methods adopted by the faculty for different programmes.  
46. How does the department ensure that programme objectives are constantly met and learning outcomes are monitored?   
47. Highlight the participation of students and faculty in extension activities. 
48. Give details of “beyond syllabus scholarly activities” of the department. 
49. State whether the programme/ department is accredited/ graded by other agencies? If yes, give details.  
50. Briefly highlight the contributions of the department in generating new knowledge, basic or applied.  
51. Detail five major Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Challenges (SWOC) of the department.  
52. Future plans of the department.  
Declaration by the Head of the Institution 
 
 
I certify that that the data included in this Self-Study Report (SSR) are true to the best of my knowledge.  
 
This SSR is prepared by the institution after internal discussions, and no part thereof has been outsourced.  
 
I am aware that the Peer team will validate the information provided in this SSR during the peer team visit.  
 
 
Signature of the Head of the institution                                                                                     with seal:  
 
 
 
Place:  
Date: 
 
 

Glossary  
 
Academic audit: An exercise which serves to provide assurance that the delegated responsibilities for quality and standards of academic provision are being appropriately discharged. 
 
Academic calendar: The schedule of the institution for the academic year, giving details of all academic and administrative events. 
 
Academic flexibility: Choice offered to the students in the curriculum offering and the curriculum transactions. 
 
Accreditation: Certification of quality that is valid for a fixed period, which in the case of NAAC is five years. 
 
Assessment: Performance evaluation of an institution or its units based on certain established criteria. 
 
Assessors: Trained academics or experts who represent NAAC on peer teams. 
 
# Benchmarks: An example of good performance that serves as a standard for comparison of one’s own performance. It is a technique in which an institution measures its performance against that of the best of others.  
 
Beyond syllabus scholarly activities: Participation in academic activities beyond the minimum requirements of the syllabus. 
 
Blended learning: A mixing of different learning environments such as traditional face-to-face classroom methods with modern computer-mediated activities.   
 
Bridge course: A teaching module which helps to close the gap between two levels of competence. 
 
Carbon neutral: A term used to describe fuels that neither contribute to nor reduce the amount of carbon (measured in the release of carbon dioxide) into the atmosphere. 
 
Catering to student diversity: The strategies adopted by institution to fulfill the needs of a heterogeneous group of students. 
 
Choice based credit system: A mode of learning in higher education which facilitates a student to have some freedom in selecting his/her own choices, across various disciplines for completing a UG / PG programme. It is popularly known as the cafeteria model.  
 
Citation index: The number of times a research papers it is referred to by other researchers in refereed journals and is a measure of validity of its contents. 
 
Co-curricular activities: Activities, which support the curriculum such as field trips, display of academic achievements, quiz, debate, discussion, seminars, role-play, etc. 
 
Collaboration: Formal agreement/ understanding between any two or more institutions for training, research, student/faculty exchange or extension support. 
 
# Completion rates (course/programme): The ratio of the total number of learners successfully completing a course/ graduating from a programme in a given year to the total number of learners who initially enrolled on the course/programme. 
 
Constituencies: All the academic, administrative and support units of the institution. 
 
Counseling: Assisting and mentoring students individually or collectively for academic, career, personal and financial decision-making. 
 
Course outlines: List of the course modules, similar to a table of contents in a book or the outline used for writing papers. The outline defines the scope and content of the course.  
 
Course schedule: Details of classes being offered, its time, location, faculty, and its unique number which students must know in order to register. The course schedule is published prior to the commencement of registration for each semester / session.  
 
Criteria: Pre-determined standards of functioning of an institution of higher education that form the basis of assessment and accreditation as identified / defined by NAAC. 
 
Curriculum design and development: Process of defining the contents of units of study and usually obtained through needs assessment, feedback from stakeholders and expert groups. Curriculum design and curriculum development are procedures which are closely linked to the description of learning outcomes.  
 
Cycles of Accreditation: An institution undergoing the accreditation process by NAAC for the first time is said to be in Cycle 1 and the consecutive five year periods as Cycle 2, 3, etc. 
 
Dare Database - International Social Sciences Directory: Provides access to world wide information on social science, peace, and human rights research and training institutes, social science specialists, and social science periodicals. 
 
Dual degree: Pursuing two different university degrees in parallel, either at the same institution or at different institutions (sometimes in different countries), completing them in less time than it would take to earn them separately.   
 
EBSCOhost: Is an online reference resource with designed to cater to user needs and preferences at every level of research, with over 350 full text and secondary databases available. 
 
Elective courses: A choice available to students to select from among a large number of subjects. 
 
Emerging areas: New areas of study and research deemed important to pursue. These areas may have been identified by national agencies or international bodies.   
 
Enrichment courses: Value added courses offered by institution for student empowerment. They enhance the curriculum by amplifying, supplementing and replacing such parts or features as have become ineffective or obsolete. 
 
Evaluation process and reforms: Assessment of learning, teaching and evaluation process and reforms to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of the system. 
 
Extension activities: The aspect of education, which emphasizes neighborhood services. These are often integrated with curricula as extended opportunities intended to help, serve reflect and learn. The curriculum-extension interface has educational values, especially in rural India. 
Faculty development program: Programs aimed at updating the knowledge and pedagogical skills of faculty. 
 
# Feedback: a) formative and evaluative comments given by tutors on the performance of individual learners.      
b) evaluative comments made by stakeholders to the institution on the quality and effectiveness of a defined process. 
c) response from students, academic peers and employers for review and design of curriculum. 
 
Financial management: Budgeting and optimum utilization of financial resources. 
 
Flexibility: A mechanism through which students have wider choices of programmes to choose from, as well as, multiple entry and exit points for programmes / courses.  
 
Gender Audit: A tool and a process based on a methodology to promote organizational learning at the individual, work unit and organizational levels on how to practically and effectively mainstream gender.  
 
Graduate Attributes: Qualities, skills and understandings a university community agrees its students should develop during their time with the institution. These attributes include, but go beyond, the disciplinary expertise or technical knowledge that has traditionally formed the core of most university courses. They are qualities that also prepare graduates as agents for social good in an unknown future.1  
 
Green Audit: The process of assessing the environmental impact of an organization, process, project, product, etc.    
 
# Grievance redressal: Mechanisms for receiving, processing and addressing dissatisfaction expressed, complaints and other formal requests made by learners, staff and other stakeholders on the institutional provisions promised and perceived. 
 
h-index (Hirsch Index): An index that attempts to measure both the productivity and impact of the published work of a scientist or scholar. The index is based on the set of the scientist’s most cited papers and the number of citations that they have received in other publications. The index can also be applied to the productivity and impact of a group of scientists, such as a department or university or country. 
 
Human Resource Management: The process of assessing the human power requirements, recruiting, monitoring the growth and appraising them periodically and plan the staff development programs for the professional development and provide the necessary incentives and feedback. 
 
Humanities International Complete: A comprehensive database covering journals, books and reference sources in the humanities. This database provides citation information for articles, essays and reviews, as well as original creative works including poems and fiction. Photographs, paintings and illustrations are also referenced. 
 
ICT: Consists of the hardware, software, networks and media for the collection, storage, processing, transmission and presentation of information (voice, data, text, images) as well as related services.2 
 
Impact factor (IF): A measure of the citations to science and social sciences journals.  The impact factor for a journal is calculated based on a three-year period and can be considered to be the average number of times published papers are cited up to 2 years after publication. 
 
Incinerator: Waste destruction in a furnace by controlled burning at high temperatures.  
 
Infrastructure: Physical facilities like building, play fields, hostels etc. which help run an institutional program.  
 
Institutional Eligibility for Quality Assessment (IEQA): Eligibility granted to an Affiliated / Constituent colleges which are seeking assessment and accreditation for the first time.  
 
Institutional Social Responsibility (ISR): Focuses on the institution’s responsibilities to the public in terms of protection of public health, safety and the environment, the public ethical behavior and the need to practice good citizenship. 
 
# Interdisciplinary research: An integrative approach in which information from more than one discipline is used in interpreting the content of a subject, phenomenon, theory or principle. 
 
Internal Quality Assurance System (IQAS): Self regulated responsibilities of the higher education institutions aimed at continuous improvement of quality for achieving academic and administrative excellence. 
 
Leadership: Term used for setting direction and create a student-focused, learning oriented climate, clear and visible values and high expectation by ensuring the creation of strategies, system and methods for achieving excellence, stimulating innovation and building knowledge and capabilities. 
 
Learning outcomes: Specific intentions of a programme or module, written in clear terms. They describe what a student should know, understand, or be able to do at the end of that programme or module. 
 
Library as a learning resource: The library holdings in terms of titles of books, journals and other learning materials and technology aided learning mechanism, which enable the students to acquire information, knowledge and skills required for their study. 
 
# New technologies: Digital tools and resources (hardware and software) and their application in the field of education. 
 
# Open educational resources: Educational materials and resources offered freely and openly for anyone to use and under some licenses to re-mix, improve and redistribute. 
 
Optimum utilization of infrastructure: The infrastructure facilities are made available to the student for their maximum utilization. e.g. Extended hours for computer center and library, sharing of facilities for interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary programs. 
 
Organizational structure: The structure and functions of an institution to co-ordinate academic and administrative planning. 
 
Outreach activities: Is the practice of conducting local public awareness activities through targeted community interaction. They are guided by a local needs assessment. 
 
Participative management: Refers to an open form of management where employees are actively involved in the institution’s decision making process.  
 
Perspective development: Is a blue print regarding the objectives and targets of long term growth.   
 
Physical facilities: Infrastructure facilities of the institution to run the educational programs efficiently and the growth of the infrastructure to keep pace with the academic growth of the institution. 
 
Program options: A range of courses offered to students to choose at various levels leading to degrees/ diplomas/ certificates. 
 
Promotion of research and research support system: The process of promoting research culture among faculty and students by facilitating faculty and student participation in research budget allocation, research fellowship and other faculties. 
 
Remedial courses: Courses offered to academically disadvantaged students in order to help them cope with academic requirements. 
 
Research: Systematic intellectual investigations aimed at discovering, interpreting and revising human knowledge. 
 
Research grant: Grant generated/ received from different agencies by the institution for conducting research projects.  
 
Research output: Quality research outcome beneficial for the discipline, society, industry and dissemination of knowledge including theoretical and practical findings. 
 
Resource mobilization: Generation of funds through internal and external sources such as donations, consultancy, self-financing courses and so on. 
 
Scopus: The world’s largest abstract and citation database of peer-reviewed literature and quality web sources. 
 
SJR (Sclmago Journal Rank): This takes three years of publication data into account to assign relative scores to all the sources (journal articles, conference proceedings, review articles, etc.) in a citation network (Journals in SCOPUS database).  
 
SNIP (Source Normalized Impact per Person): Is the ratio of the source’s average citation count per paper in a three year citation window over the “citation potential” of its subject field.  
 
Stakeholder relationship: Affiliation and interaction with groups or individuals who have an interest in the actions of the institutions and the ability to influence its actions, decisions, policies, practices or goals of the organization. 
 
# Strategic Plan: A specific, action-oriented medium or long-term plan for making progress towards a set of institutional goals. 
 
Strategy development: Formulation of objectives, directives and guidelines with specific plans for institutional development. 
 
Student profile: The student community of the institution, their strength and the diversity in terms of economic and social strata, location and other demographic aspects such as gender, age, religion, caste, rural/ urban. 
 
Student progression: Vertical movement of students from one level of education to the next higher level successfully or towards gainful employment. 
 
Student support: Facilitating mechanism for access to information fee structure and refund policies and also guidance and placement cell with student welfare measures to give necessary learning support to the students. 
 
Teacher quality: A composite term to indicate the qualification of the faculty, the adequacy meant for recruitment procedures, professional development, recognition and teachers characteristics. 
 
Teaching-learning process: Learner-centered education through appropriate methodologies to facilitate effective teaching and learning. 
 
Twinning programmes: An arrangement between two institutions where a provider in source country A collaborates with a provider in Country B to allow students to take course credits in Country B and/or in source Country A. Only one qualification is awarded by the provider in source Country A. Arrangements for twinning programs and awarding of degrees usually comply with national regulations of the provider in source Country A. 
 
Web of Science: An online academic citation index designed for providing access to multiple databases, cross-disciplinary research, and in-depth exploration of specialized subfields within an academic or scientific discipline. 
 
Weightages:  Taking cognizance of the different types of educational institutions, differential scores are assigned to the criteria and key aspects.  
 
 
 
# 	From Quality Assurance Toolkit for Distance Higher Education Institutions and Programmes. 
 
1 Bowden et al 2000 from http://www.curtin.edu.my/T&L/doc/Graduate_Attributes.pdf  
2 World Bank  http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/EXTEDUCATION 
---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------





 Manual for Universities                                                                                           Page 1 of 83 
 

 Manual for Universities                                                                                           Page 1 of 83 
 



 Manual for Universities                                                                                           Page 1 of 83 
 





 Manual for Universities                                                                                           Page 10 of 83 
 

 Manual for Universities                                                                                           Page 10 of 83 
 



 Manual for Universities                                                                                           Page 10 of 83 
 



? 

? 
 Manual for Universities                                                                                           Page 52 of 83  

 Manual for Universities                                                                                           Page 10 of 83 
 



? 
 Manual for Universities                                                                                           Page 52 of 83  





 Manual for Universities                                                                                           Page 10 of 83 
 

 Manual for Universities                                                                                           Page 10 of 83 
 



 Manual for Universities                                                                                           Page 10 of 83 
 

