
 
 
Scheme of Pandit Madan Mohan 
Malaviya  
National Mission on  
Teachers and Teaching (PMMMNMTT)  
 
 
 
 
 
GUIDELINES  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of Higher Education 
Ministry of Human Resource Development 
Government of India 
May, 2015 
  
1 
 INDEX 
Executive Summary 	 
Chapter-I       Overview of the Mission 	 
 
           1.1       Goals  
            1.2      Mission Strategies  
           1.3      Outcomes 
           1.4      Deliverables 
           1.5      Components 
Chapter-II     Programmatic and Financial Norms 	 
 
	2.1 	  Broad eligibility and selection criteria  
     2.2       Component-wise programmatic and financial norms 
 
Chapter-III    Funds Flow 	 
	3.1 	 Funds flow & payment norms for various activities 
         3.2     Guiding Norms for Infrastructure Development and Recurring costs EXECUTIVE SUMMARY OF THE SCHEME OF PANDIT MADAN MOHAN MALVIYA  
NATIONAL MISSION ON TEACHERS AND TEACHING (PMMMNMTT) 
Sl. 
No. Name  of the 
Component Number of 
Institutions
/ Units Description 1 Schools of 
Education 30 1. Will 	be 	established 	in 	Central universities.  
2. School of Education will have an international mentoring partner. It will comprise of several units/centres and undertake in-depth work in specific areas of elementary and secondary teacher and school education. Offer programmes for teachers, teacher educators, administrators.  
3. A sound proposal from the central university will be the basis of approval. 2.  50 Centres of 
Excellence for 
Curriculum and 
Pedagogy  50 ? 
? 
? There are three sub-components under this: 
Teaching Learning Centres: 25 Nos.  
Faculty Development Centres:20 Nos.  Centres of Excellence in Science and Mathematics Education: 5 Nos. 
 2 A Centres of 
Excellence in 
Science and 
Mathematics 
Education 5 1. 
2. Will be established in IISc, Homi Bhabha Science Centre, TIFR and University 
Departments 	of 	Science 	and 
Mathematics.  
It will incubate and nurture, on a continuous basis, discipline-specific curricula, pedagogy, learning materials (including e-content) for use by the schools and colleges and postgraduate departments.  3. A sound proposal from specific institutions of excellence will be sought on invitation basis. 2 B Teaching 
Learning Centres 25 1. The TLC's will be set up at different levels such as, university 
schools/Faculty       
departments/centers and colleges. 2. TLCs will promote on a continuous basis, discipline-specific curricula, pedagogy, learning materials (including e-content) for use by the teachers in colleges and postgraduate departments.  3. Competitive basis of selection will be adopted on sound proposals from above institutions.  2C Faculty 
Development 
Centres 20  1. The FDC's will be set up at different levels such as Academic Staff Colleges, university schools/Faculty departments/centers  and colleges. 2. FDCs will inculcate among teachers the motivations to promote institutional effectiveness through the development of personal, instructional, organizational and professional growth of faculty 3. Competitive basis of selection will be adopted on sound proposals from above institutions. 3 Inter-University 
Centre for 
Teachers 
Education 
(IUCTE) 2 1. 
2. All National level institutions of repute specialising in teacher education can apply for establishing IUCTE. 
To provide access for research and teaching community to the state-of-theart equipment and excellent library facilities, to play a vital role in offering the best expertise in teacher education across universities 3. Proposals by invitation to national level institutions will be examined and approved 4.  Innovations, 
Awards and 
Teaching 
Resource Grant/Support for faculty, including 
Workshops and As decided by the PAB 1. The scheme is envisaged at the national, state and institutional level to cover the entire higher education. 
2. To recognize and reward excellence among teachers in higher education. 
3. To promote innovations in teaching through resource grant support.  
4. National and International Workshops/Conferences can be Seminars organised 	by 	Central 	and 	State institutions  
5. Examine extant international policies and suggest what is appropriate to national and regional requirements. 5.   Subject 
Networks for 
Curricular  
Renewal and 
Reforms As decided by the PAB 1. Subject-based Network is a voluntary association of academicians willing to cooperate in searching and sharing of knowledge related to teaching, learning and research. 2. The proposer will be Professor or the Retired Professor who will initiate the proposal for SBNW.  The proposal will be routed through existing subject department of the university or  a college covered under 2f and 12(B) of the UGC Act.   6.  National 
Resource Centre for Education /Higher 
Education 
Academy 1 1. Will be set up with the vision of developing teachers who are able to enhance their potentials and push the frontiers of knowledge through research, networking and sharing of existing resources in the competitive  knowledge world. 2. An apex Central level body may be invited to submit the proposal to set up the National Resource Centre.  7.  Institutes of 
Academic 
Leadership and 
Education 
Management 5 
 1. Will be set up with the objective of imparting training of academic leaders of the vast numbers of institutions of higher education in the country  
2.To build the managerial base of    academic heads of DIETs and SCERTs 
3. Proposals for setting up five institutes of 
Academic leadership and Education Management will be invited from the institutes of excellence engaged in educational management and central and state universities and selected on competitive basis.   
 
CHAPTER I 
 
OVERVIEW OF THE MISSION 
 
1. 	Introduction 
 
      The proposed Mission is envisaged to address comprehensively all issues related to teachers, teaching, teacher preparation and professional development. The Mission would address, on the one hand, current and urgent issues such as supply of qualified teachers, attracting talent into teaching profession and raising the quality of teaching in schools and colleges. On the other, it is also envisaged that the Teacher Mission would pursue long term goal of building a strong professional cadre of teachers by setting performance standards and creating top class institutional facilities for innovative teaching and professional development of teachers. 
    The Mission would focus in a holistic manner dealing with the whole sector of education without fragmenting the programmes based on levels and sectors as school, higher, technical etc. It is considered that programmes dealing with teachers in all sectors and levels of education should grow and function in a mutually supportive manner. It will try to bridge the gap between teachers and teacher educators and provide opportunities for teachers to become teacher educators.  
      The Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya National Mission on Teachers and Teaching (PMMMNMTT) is a Central sector Scheme with All- India coverage. This scheme will commence in 2014-15 for a period of three years i.e. from 2014-15 to 2016-17 during XII Plan. 
1.1 Goals  
    The Government of India is mandated to launch a Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya National Mission on Teachers and Teaching with the following goals: > To ensure a coordinated approach so as to holistically address the various shortcomings relating to teachers and teaching across the educational spectrum ranging from school education to higher education including technical education; using the best international practices for excellence. 
> To create and strengthen the institutional mechanisms (Schools of Education, Institutes of Academic leadership and Education Management, Subject based networks, Teaching–learning Centres etc.) at the Centre & in the States, for augmenting training and discipline–wise capacity building of faculty and their periodic assessment for excellence. 
> To empower teachers and faculty during through training, re-training, refresher and orientation programmes in generic skills, pedagogic skills, discipline specific content upgradation, ICT and technology enabled training and other appropriate interventions.   
 
1.2 Mission Strategies  
The Mission goals are sought to be achieved through a combination of: 
? 	Programmatic and scheme based interventions: pre-service & in-
service training through existing and new institutional structures, new academic programmes & courses, strengthening post-graduate and doctoral programmes, prescheduling year long training calendars, online training; 
? Project based activities: ICT based training, training of Mathematics, Science, Language teachers for schools, Core science & engineering courses in technical education, general courses in social sciences, humanities and vocational courses. 
1.3 Outcomes  
The proposed Mission will meet the challenges for the teacher education system arising from the massive expansion of education at all levels ranging from elementary, secondary, higher, technical and also vocational education and the consequent corresponding increase in the demand for teachers. New Teacher education courses will be designed to meet the professional development needs of teachers and faculty so as to infuse innovation in pedagogy leading to better learning outcomes. A variety of initiatives will be taken for the professional development of teacher educators, specifically creating conditions for them to participate in Refresher Courses and Fellowship Programmes and for curricular reform in teacher education. A critical component will be to integrate elementary teacher education with the Higher Education by instituting Schools of Education and breaking the insularity of elementary teacher development and practices.  
1.4   Deliverables 
Overall, in terms of numbers, the Mission is intended to achieve the following:  
• Over one lakh qualified teachers for schools, general and technical education colleges and universities across various disciplines;  
• Within the one lakh ensure that adequate numbers of SC, ST, OBC, Minorities and Women are inducted; 
• Create a sufficient base of teacher educators and promote excellence in faculty for academic leadership positions; 
• Create around 87 new institutional structures (30 Schools of Education, 50 Centres of Excellence for Curriculum and Pedagogy,  5 institutes of Academic Leadership & Education Management,  2 Inter University Centres for Teachers Education;  
• Create subject based networks in different disciplines.  
1.5 Components  
 
1. 	Institutional Oriented  
 
? 	Creation of New Institutional Arrangements 
 
(i) Schools of Education (30 Nos.)  
 
(ii) Centres of Excellence for Curriculum and Pedagogy (50). 
 
(iii) Inter-University Centres for Teacher Education (2) 
 
 
2. 	Individual Oriented 
 
(i)  	Innovations, Awards, Teaching Resource Grant including Workshops and Seminars 
 
 
3. 	Networks and Alliances 
 
(i) Subject Networks for Curricular Renewal and Reforms  
(ii) National Resource Centre for Education /Higher Education Academy 
 
 
4. 	Academic Leadership 
? Institutes of Academic Leadership and Education Management (5 Nos.)   CHAPTER II 
 
PROGRAMMATIC AND FINANCIAL NORMS OF VARIOUS COMPONENTS 
These guidelines are intended for the use of Central and State institutions who wish to participate in the Mission with a view to improve the quality of teachers and teaching in their institutions, by addressing current and urgent issues relating to supply of qualified teachers, attracting talent into teaching profession and raising the quality of teaching and pursue long term goal of building a strong professional cadre of teachers through professional development of teachers during the 12th Five Year 
Plan period. The selection of Institutions for all the components will be decided by Project Approval Board (PAB) through competitive process subject to the institutions/ individuals fulfilling the conditions specified in these guidelines. The estimated capital/ infrastructure development cost and the recurring costs specified for each component is upper ceiling limit and each proposal will be examined based on the actual requirements. Also, it is stated that the expenditure on creation of assets is covered under the Non-Recurring component. 
 
2.1 Broad eligibility and selection criteria  
Sl. 
No.  Details of Component   Selection Process  I Institutional Oriented  
? Creation 	of 	New 	Institutional 
Arrangements 
 
(i)Schools of Education (30 Nos.)  
 
(ii) Centres 	of 	Excellence 	for 
Curriculum and Pedagogy (50) 
 
(iii) Inter-University 	Centres 	for 
Teacher Education 
 
 All sub-components will be through two stage competitive process by 
Project Approval Board (PAB)  
 
Only for Central Universities 
 
Central, State and support for private  initiatives also to be considered 
 
Only for Central & State Univs.  
(Preference for Central Universities) 
 
 II Individual Oriented 
 
(ii) Innovations, Awards , Teaching Resource Grant, including Workshops and Seminars 
  
 
Eligible candidates including those from private institutions of teacher education will compete for the award of fellowships. 
 III  Networks and Alliances 
(i) Subject Networks for Curricular 
Renewal and Reforms  
(ii) National Resource Centre for 
Education /Higher Education 
Academy  
To be decided by Project Approval Board (PAB) through competitive process 
 IV Academic Leadership (5) 
? Institutes of Academic Leadership  
and Education Management   
To be decided by Project Approval Board (PAB) through competitive process  
1.2. 	Component-wise programmatic and financial norms 
 
Component 1  30 Schools of Education Introduction 
The Schools of Education will form the main backbone for integrated teacher development across all sectors. It is proposed that each School of Education will have an international mentoring partner so that it benefits from the global best practices and thinking in teacher development. It is proposed to establish School of Education in the Central University. It is proposed to establish overall 30 schools of education. School of Education will comprise of several units/centres that would undertake in-depth work in specific areas that have remained neglected in areas of elementary and secondary teacher and school education. These include concerted research and material development in areas of Curriculum Studies, Pedagogic Studies, Assessment and Evaluation apart from the responsibility of educating teachers and teacher educators. 
Each of the Schools of Education set up in the 30 select institutions will offer some of the suggested academic programmes to offer via a set of separate but integrated centres. All Schools of Education need not be a clone of each other. Each can take up some domain specializations depending on their individual core strengths. The Schools of education will offer new academic programmes to meet the professional needs of teacher education, such as teacher educator, administrators and leadership positions at different levels ranging from elementary, secondary, higher and technical education levels. 
Vision 
To develop teacher education in a holistic integrated manner within the higher education system so that Central Universities can address teacher development for all levels of education ranging from elementary to higher education, including technical education. 
  
Mission 
To develop Schools of Education within Central Universities as the core pace-setting institutions to spear head the professional development of teachers and teacher educators.  
Objectives 
1. To conduct various academic programmes to meet the teaching requirements of elementary, secondary and higher education, 
2. To conduct research in curriculum development, pedagogy, special education, language teaching.  
3. To develop as model institutions for teacher education with state of art facilities and human resource expertise. 
4. To ensure integrated and inter-sectoral linkages across all levels of the hierarchy of teacher education.  
  Suggested academic programmes ( as per NCTE norms) which Schools of Education can offer: 
• Masters in Elementary education. 
• Bachelors and Masters in Secondary education. 
• Bachelors and Masters in Early Childhood Education. 
• Advance Diploma in Educational Management. 
• Masters in Educational Studies 
• Masters in Educational management –MBA(Ed.) 
• M. Phil/Ph. D. in Educational Studies 
CENTRES WITHIN SCHOOLS OF EDUCATION :  
(i) Centre for pre-service teacher education 
(ii) Curriculum research, policy and educational development 
(iii) Centre for learning and pedagogic studies 
(iii) A) Centre for teaching of English language 
(iv) Centre for assessment and evaluation 
(v) Centre for professional development of teacher educators 
(vi) Centre for teacher resource and academic support Conditions of Eligibility  / Implementation Design  
• All Central Universities to set up Schools of Education. 
• Existing Departments of Education within Central Universities can upgrade to Schools of Education. 
• Must be willing to set up any one or more of the above-mentioned Centres and offer one or more of the suggested academic programmes( as per NCTE norms). 
• The physical infrastructure, such as lecture halls, office space, already available with the institution must to a great extent support the additional enrollments 
likely through new academic programmes being offered.  
• Should have adequate library, hostel, laboratory, ICT facilities for meeting the academic requirements of teacher education programmes. 
• Must be willing to assign existing faculty, academic and administrative staff to take up new responsibilities associated with conducting new academic programmes and also the day to day work of the proposed new centres.   
• Should have been accredited by NAAC and must have not less than an ‘A’ Grade.  
• Should have teaching programmes both in undergraduate and postgraduate courses. It must also have credible research capacity as evidenced through research, guideship and publications of faculty members. 
• The college must be multi-faculty (at least two or more faculties such as Arts, Commerce, Science, Engineering, Law etc) 
• Should have inter-disciplinary programmes in teaching and research.  
• Must have a robust internal governance structure: with Academic Council, Board of Studies/Research Councils and Finance Committees as per the guidelines of the regulatory body. 
• Adherence to merit-based admission of students. 
• In case of residential programmes, 50% of hostel seats should be reserved for socially and economically weaker sections. 
• Adherence to the reservation policy of State government in admission and faculty recruitment. Financial norms  
The overall limits of financial costs for capital and recurring cost of each School of Education are Rs. 7.50 crore for non-recurring ( subject to a ceiling of Rs.5.41 Crore for civil works)  and Rs.2.00 crore per year for recurring cost.                                  Component 2   Centres of Excellence in Science and Mathematics 
Education (5 Nos.)  Introduction 
The present system focuses only on increasing the quantum of teachers. It does not focus on the pool of excellent teachers. There is acute dearth of high quality Science and Mathematics teachers both at the level of school and colleges. Besides the research in the field of Basic Science and Mathematics is far from satisfactory. There is the need to promote excellence in Basic Science and Mathematics education and increase the pool of both teachers and researchers. To develop Science and 
Mathematics education and to increase the pool of teachers it is envisaged to 
develop 5 Centres of Excellence in Science and Mathematics Education in the institutions of repute. The Centres of Excellence will help the schools and colleges to improve their standards of science and mathematics education in a highly competitive situation and may enable the nation to emerge as a global leader in education. 
Vision  
To develop high quality science and mathematics teachers who are able to develop themselves as role models as teachers and teacher educators in science and mathematics in the competitive educational system and the diversified knowledge requirements of the contemporary society. 
Mission 
• To accelerate science and mathematics education by way of promoting independent, critical and creative thinking. 
• To hand hold the scientific teaching community in facilitating teaching and research for subject specific growth 
• To enable the development of skills engaging latest technological devices as aids to teaching-learning process. 
• To help teachers in capacity building for curriculum designing and scientific assessment and evaluation.  
• To develop innovative programmes that will strengthen the inclusive nature of higher education by bringing the disadvantaged and marginalized sections of the society. 
Objectives 
1. To excel in science and mathematics education in schools and colleges 
2. To create a pool of talented teachers in science and mathematics 
3. To develop innovative programme in science and mathematics 
4. To develop the capacity of science and mathematics teachers 
Implementation Design 
Centres of Excellence in Science and Mathematics education should conduct a programme at the Bachelors and Postgraduate levels which should integrate the professional specialization needed to be teachers/teacher educators. Besides it should run few short run courses for the development of curriculum and pedagogy in science and mathematics.  Research Cells can also be located within Centres to undertake research on different aspects of teaching. 
Specifically, Centres of Excellence in Science and Mathematics Education will incubate and nurture, on a continuous basis, discipline-specific curricula, pedagogy, learning materials (including e-content) for use by the schools and colleges and postgraduate departments. Proposals for creation of such Centres should be invited from IISc, Homi Bhabha Centre, TIFR and University and Colleges Departments of Science and Mathematics which have high reputation.  Financial norms 
The estimated cost of capital/ infrastructure development per Centre is envisaged to be Rs. 4.64 crore( subject to a ceiling of Rs.4.23 Crore for civil works). The recurring cost for each Centre is Rs. 1.00 crore per year Component 3 Teaching Learning Centres (25 Nos.)  Introduction 
The present system focuses only on the domain (subject) knowledge of the teachers. It does not focus on the importance of teaching-learning process, pedagogical content and its various tools which are very vital to increase the quality of learning experience in the different educational programmes. The focus on teaching-learning process will engage teachers towards the student concern, attention and interest. This will make the educational programme more meaningful and socially relevant. Proposed TLCs assume importance in the context of learner centred approaches, ICT integrated learning and recent researches in new pedagogic approaches to teaching and learning in higher education. The curricular reforms in universities and colleges in the context of interdisciplinarity and applied approaches to knowledge have become necessary. The evaluation process needs to be made more scientific to encourage the development of multiple skills of students. Indian universities suffer from poor ranking in global scenario. An important reason for the poor ranking is the low capacity of teachers in effective teaching - learning and research. TLCs will help the universities to improve their ranking by performing better in a highly competitive situation and may enable the nation to emerge as a global leader in education. 
Vision  
To develop effective and efficient teachers who are responsive to the needs of the learners in both local and global contexts, in the competitive educational system and the diversified knowledge requirements of the contemporary society. 
 
 
Mission 
• To accelerate teaching-learning process by way of promoting independent, critical and creative thinking. 
• To hand hold the teaching community in facilitating research for subject specific growth 
• To enable the development of skills engaging latest technological devices as aids to teaching-learning process. 
• To help faculty in capacity building for curriculum designing and scientific assessment and evaluation.  
• To develop innovative programmes that will strengthen the inclusive nature of higher education by bringing the disadvantaged and marginalized sections of the society. 
Objectives 
1. To develop discipline-specific curricular framework and evaluation methods for incorporation into workshops and short-term professional development programmes of; 
2. To outline and recommend pedagogy and schemes of assessment  appropriate for the curricular framework; 
3. To develop learning materials, including textbooks and handbooks and to organize their translation into regional languages; 
4. To be repositories of resources, including reference services and electronic data bases, for promoting research on issues relating to teaching and learning practices 
 TLC should conduct a short run to medium run (3 weeks) and long run (3-6 months) rigorous pre-induction programs for the new-entrants.  
Implementation Design 
Specifically, TLCs will incubate and nurture, on a continuous basis, discipline-specific curricula, pedagogy, learning materials (including e-content) for use by the colleges and postgraduate departments. All possible attempts will be made to find out alternatives to the existing paradigms i.e. paradigms of teaching, learning and assessment. The relation between TLCs and ASCs by design should be mutual and supportive. TLCs must respond to the specific demands of ASC’s for specifically designed short-term programmes. The TLC's will be set up at different levels such as 
Academic Staff Colleges, university schools/Faculty departments/centers and 
colleges. As such Proposals for creation of TLC’s should be invited from Academic Staff Colleges, university schools/Faculty departments/centers and colleges. Research Cells can also be located within TLC's to undertake research on different aspects of teaching.  Financial Norms 
The capital /infrastructure development cost for setting up of each TLC is envisaged to be Rs. 4.28 crore ( subject to a ceiling of Rs.3.90 Crore for civil works)  during the entire period of the Mission. The recurring cost for each Centre is Rs. 1.10 crore per year Component 4 Faculty Development Centres (20 Nos.) Introduction 
Faculty development is an essential element of Institutional effectiveness.  The extent to which the institution supports faculty development will be strongly reflected in levels of the engagement in learning activities, conduct of research and ultimately fulfilling the objectives and goals of the university. Faculty who engage in professional development experiences benefit also in terms of increased vitality, better informed in terms of development taking in various spheres of education and allied fields, innovations and scholarly learning. Moreover, faculty professional development contributes to the effective use of emerging technologies and establishes a firm foundation for the overall development of high quality programs and curricula. 
Faculty development programmes include the four possible types of development: personal (interpersonal skills, career development, and life planning issues); instructional (course design and development, instructional technology); organizational (ways to improve the institutional environment to better support teaching); and professional (ways to support faculty members so that they fulfill their multiple roles of teaching, research, and service). Faculty development has a critical role to play in promoting academic excellence and innovation. 
Vision 
To inculcate among teachers the motivations to promote institutional effectives through the development of personal, instructional, organizational and professional growth of faculty 
Mission 
? To promote organizational strategies for faculty development so as to incentivise teachers to grow professionally and enable the institutions to 
grow. 
• Faculty development is expected to result in improved teaching performance and better learning outcomes for students and teachers. 
• Promotes new ways of thinking about the student-teacher relationship, and increased commitment to educational scholarship.  
• Developing all round skills are a prominent aspect for faculty development.  
Objectives and Programmes 
In general all the faculty members need to be provided the opportunities to participate in professional development programmes in order to enrich their knowledge.  It is felt that opportunities to all the faculty members should be provided in attending:  
a. Training Programmes (national and international)  
b. Seminars/Conferences (national and international) 
c. Internship Programmes (national and international) 
d. Summer Schools (national and international) 
e. Exchange programmes (national and international) 
    
Implementation Design 
Training programme during the probation can be planned so that the persons who enter the university is sensitized of their roles and responsibilities in a college or university. Faculty development centres should conduct a short run to medium run (3 weeks) and long run (3-6 months) rigorous pre-induction programs for the newentrants. Specifically, FDCs will incubate and nurture, on a continuous basis the professional development of teachers and create opportunities for professional growth. The relation between FDCs and ASCs by design should be mutual and supportive. The FDC's will be set up at different levels such as Academic Staff Colleges, university schools/Faculty departments/centers  and colleges. As such Proposals for creation of FDC’s should be invited from Academic Staff Colleges, university schools/Faculty departments/centers  and colleges.  Research Cells can also be located within FDC's to undertake research on different aspects of professional development of teachers.  Financial Norms 
The capital /infrastructure development cost for setting up of each FDC is envisaged to be Rs. 4.28 crore ( subject to a ceiling of Rs.3.90 Crore for civil works)  during the entire period of the Mission. The recurring cost for each Centre is Rs. 1.10 crore per year.  
Component 5 Inter-University Centre for Teachers Education (IUCTE) 
(2 Nos.) Introduction 
The UGC establishes autonomous Inter-University Centres within the university system under Clause 12(ccc) of the UGC Act. The objectives for setting up these centres are: 
• To provide common advanced centralized facilities/services for universities which are not able to invest heavily in infrastructure and other inputs. 
• To play a vital role in offering the best expertise in each field to teachers and researchers across the country. 
• To provide access for research and teaching community to the state-of-theart equipment and excellent library facilities which are comparable to international standards. 
Two Inter-University Centres for Teacher Education are proposed under National Mission to cater to the needs of large teaching community in India. These IUCs will work in co-ordinated manner with the Inter-University Centres established by UGC within the university system under Clause 12(ccc) of the UGC Act.  
 
Vision 
The vision of these Centres will be to provide a separate yet integrated focus on elementary and secondary levels of school education and co-ordinate the Schools of Education established under the National Mission of Teachers and Teaching.  
 
Mission 
 
IUCTE’s will coordinate between the Schools of Education set up in Central Universities to provide a collaborative platform for the teaching community so as to promote their research interests and develop their inter-disciplinary perspectives. 
 
Objectives 
a. To bring about convergence among the various activities carried out by the different Centres located within the Schools of Education in Central Universities. 
b. To play a vital role in offering the best expertise in the field of teacher education to practitioners and researchers across the country. 
c. To promote national and international cooperation in teachers' education.   
d. To redesign of teacher education curricula for secondary and elementary teacher education, developing curriculum materials, both offline and on-line, including commissioning of materials in regional languages through the specific state-based institutions such as SCERTs.  
e. To provide common advanced centralized facilities/services for universities 
which may not be available within individual stand alone institutions. 
f. To publish advanced research studies relating to teachers' education for purposes of advancement of capacities to teach and learn among professional teachers. 
Conditions for Eligibility  
 
1. Any National level institution of repute specialising in teacher education can apply. 
2. Such an institution must be able to network with all Central Universities  
3. The physical facilities such as library, ICT based infrastructure, laboratories, already available with the institution must support the research and collaborative work intended to be carried out through the IUC. 
4. In case, individual institutions do not qualify, a hub and spoke model with a lead institution and supporting nodes can also be considered.  
5. The governance structure must be clearly specified. 
6. Since no additional posts are to be created, redeployment of existing faculty and staff must be included in the proposal.  
Financial norms 
 
The projected cost specifying the total limit for setting up of each IUC is Rs. 7.30 crore for non-recurring( subject to a ceiling of Rs.5.27 Crore for civil works)   and Rs.6.10 crore per year for recurring costs. (recurring costs include subscription to Ejournals & E-books) 
 Component 6 Innovations, Awards and Teaching Resource Grant, including workshops and seminars   Introduction 
Teachers in higher education must be incentivised for undertaking innovations in teaching and learning approaches. Areas of innovation could be curriculum, pedagogy, evaluation, integration of technology, promoting inclusion of marginalized sections, innovations in funding, collaborations etc. Sometimes to carry out certain innovations resource grant mat be needed. To promote innovations the resource grant may be needed before the innovations and sometimes the innovations after their success may be recognized and awarded. Thus the proposed scheme will encourage innovations in higher education. 
Vision 
Promotion of excellence by recognizing and rewarding innovations by teachers. 
Mission 
The programme will encourage innovations by the teachers throughout the higher 
education community. The women's colleges, minority colleges, rural colleges' teachers efforts need the recognition at the institutional and the state level. The scheme will search for the talents throughout the length and breadth of the country.  
Objectives 
1. To promote innovations including in teaching and learning through the resource grant to the teachers. 
2. To recognise and identify talent among the teachers and reward the teachers at the institutional, state and national level 
Introduction 
Workshops and seminars to discuss and evolve strategies for suggested policy  recommendations documented in several Reports for faculty related matters can  be undertaken under this component. Examining extant international policies and  adopting some of them appropriate to national and regional requirements can  be explored. Brainstorming and detailed deliberations on the pros and cons  of some of the identified policy steps would help to firm up some our own policies.  Implementation Design 
All Central, State public Funded institutions including aided institutions  conducting seminars or workshops on any areas listed under the various  components can be supported. Proposals will be examined in the PAB. The  expenditure under this head can be incurred from within the funds provided under  the respective relevant component subject to the following ceilings: 
• National Workshops/ Seminar of maximum of five days (30-40 participants) : Rs 15 lakhs 
• National Conferences of three days duration (50 -60 participants): Rs. 15 lakhs 
• International Workshop/ Conference for about 50 participants : Rs 50 lakhs 
Implementation Plan 
A detailed procedure in this regarding will be finalized as per recommendations of the Project Approval Board and approval of the Executive Committee.  
 
Financial norms 
A lump sum provision of Rs. 40 crore has been approved by the EFC for all the related components under this head. 
 
 Component 7 Subject Networks for Curricular  Renewal and Reforms 
 Introduction 
Subject-based Network is a voluntary association of academicians willing to cooperate in searching and sharing of knowledge related to teaching, learning and 
research. It will empower the teachers and researchers and help improve the quality of higher education. It will function as an academic network by and for the stakeholders of higher education for imparting and disseminating knowledge. Domain knowledge is the bedrock of any learning system. The core of education is the content which has to be transacted by the teacher to the learners. This domain knowledge is continuously growing and evolving in all the disciplines through research. This growth has to be factored in to realign the frontiers of knowledge. It is in this context that the subject based networks was conceived to play a pivotal role in transcending the boundaries and making the foundations more pervious and perfect. This network will connect the professionals of various disciplines along with respective material for cross fertilization of ideas which will create hybrid knowledge endowed with better genetic configuration. This knowledge will be periodically updated, shared and disseminated for enrichment of the disciplinary outcomes. Efforts will be made to cover the maximum number of subjects. 
Vision 
 To develop teachers who are able to enhance their potentials and push the frontiers of knowledge through research, networking and sharing on disciplines and subjects for global advantage 
Mission 
• To strengthen the resource base for the teachers in higher education                   
• To build the pool of teachers who engage on the domain knowledge in higher education. 
• To develop an electronic network for the teachers and researchers in higher education. 
Objectives 
• To create a database for all subjects in higher education 
• To develop subject related resources for teacher and professionals of higher education 
• To assemble all support material in electronic form for onward use 
• To disseminate updated subject wise material to the professionals. 
Functions 
 i. 	Create a website and other appropriate tools to support information exchange and dissemination;  ii. 	Produce an annual report on the state of innovation in its area of activity;  iii. 	Provide full information about the network’s events and activities;  
iv. 	Organize an annual meeting in the thematic area of the network. It can take the form of an open seminar or conference encouraging collaboration with 
other networks; v. Take appropriate measures regarding the evaluation of the network's performance.  
Other important activities should include the following: vi. To analyze the comparative teaching methods and experiment with new teaching methods; vii. Identify high quality teaching material and place it at the disposal of the members of the network; viii. Share practices related to semester system, choice based credit system and continuous and comprehensive evaluation with a view to constantly improving it;  ix. Help the members of the network on problems related to subjects and towards finding common solutions; x. Share research findings of the doctoral, postdoctoral research works and help the newly inducted researchers, including those registered under Ph D program in identifying references, formulating research design and helping in qualitative and quantitative research methods to analyze the research findings; xi. Subject based Network will network with another related subject based network  in order to promote interdisciplinarity and help in formulating new interdisciplinary course design by an individual or institution xii. It will promote learner centeredness and discuss ways of optimizing learning outcomes as well as adapting curricula to the needs of society xiii. Subject based networks will help in developing ethics and value system on aspects relating to teaching and research and sensitize stakeholders to develop organization culture  xiv.  Promoting synergies between teaching and research, notably by encouraging higher education institutions to integrate research results in their teaching xv. Promote synergy between undergraduate teaching and post graduate teaching and institutions xvi. Network will abstain from many other areas of controversy that surround university politics and keep its focus on teaching and learning 
Implementation Strategy/ Design 
Constitution of Subject Based Network (SBNW) 
A professor, presently working or retired, can form an association of subject scholars, not less than 50 members, who will be the members of the SBNW. The composition of the member of the network will be as follows: 
• At least 50% will be teachers employed on permanent/regular basis. 
• Rest of members will be other than regular teachers (retired teachers, nonregular teachers, free lance researchers and those who are already doctorate or registered for Ph.D. or pursuing research in individual capacity. 
The proposer will be Professor or the Retired Professor who will initiate the proposal for SBNW.  The proposal will be routed through existing subject department of the university or a college covered under 2f and 12(B) of the 
UGC Act.  The colleges will be only those having College with Potentials of Excellence status, Autonomous college and NAAC Accredited ‘A’ Grade colleges.  The proposal will be submitted to the UGC through the proper channel on announcement of the scheme by UGC.   
Membership of the network will be for two years and at the end of every two years, the renewal of the membership by the individual member will take place. The member of the particular subject network can join maximum of 3 Subject based networks. Financial norms 
Funds available under this component may be utilized  for setting up of electronic equipment for video conferencing, portal development and other online support equipment of on  human resources required for creation of a network.  Discipline wise scouting needs to be undertaken to identify the setting up of subject based network. Selected institutions and universities will be provided with the grant money along with the stipulated guidelines to establish these networks and showcase their subject strength and ability to network in providing support. 
A total provision of Rs.5.00 crore has been approved under this head by the EFC. Since computer related hardware would be needed for SBW, a sum of Rs. 0.24 crore has been estimated towards non-recurring costs. Component 8 National Resource Centre for Education /Higher 
Education Academy  Introduction 
The upward mobility of faculty in higher education across nation depends on the academic resources made available to them. This investment in human resource enhances their capabilities and helps them function  and discharge functions optimally. The current state of resources available to teachers is abysmally low and skewed leading to capping of the outcomes among the existing teaching faculty. Therefore there is the need to have  large resource repository available to the entire teaching community to strengthen their capabilities for the snowballing impact in the development of the nation. The National resource centre for higher education will provide database and identification protocol to all  teachers engaged in higher education. Further it will strengthen the capacity of faculty by providing cognitive and penumbra support for all academic initiatives. It will be an electronic depository and will provide a framework for coordination and convergence of all academic resources. 
Vision 
 To develop teachers who are able to enhance their potentials and push the frontiers of knowledge through research, networking and sharing of existing resources in the competitive knowledge world. 
Mission 
• To strengthen the resource base for the teachers in higher education               ? To build the pool of teachers with UID available for higher education. 
• To develop an electronic network for the teachers and researchers in higher education. 
Objectives 
• To create a database for all teachers in higher education 
• To provide a Unique identification number to all teacher of higher education 
• To assemble all support material in electronic form for onward use 
• To disseminate material to all registered subscribers of higher education. 
• To organize workshops, seminars and short term courses in higher education 
Implementation Strategy 
An apex Central level body may be invited to submit the proposal to set up the National Resource Centre.  Financial norms 
 The capital /infrastructure development cost for setting up of the Centre is envisaged to be Rs. 11.55 crore ( subject to a ceiling of Rs.6.81 Crore for civil works)  during the entire period of the Mission while the  recurring cost for each Centre is Rs. 15.90 crore per year,  (recurring costs include subscription to E-
journals and E-books) Component 9 Centres of Academic Leadership and Education 
Management (5 Nos.) Introduction 
Training of academic leaders of the vast numbers of institutions of higher education in the country is a critical need, especially as these institutions have to augment their functional competencies in areas of core and conventional activity, as also brace up to the immense external challenges posed by a community of universities world-wide, each aspiring to achieve a tangible status of competence, expressed to some extent in measures of ranking, and more generally in the insistence on improving quality. At the moment, there is no institutional practice for imparting training to academic leaders in higher education, and the learning is mainly by doing, or by sporadic peer-exchanges. The quantum of this challenge is evident as we see the expanded institutional provision of higher education, as per the University Grants Commission Annual Report (year),--we have over 600 Universities and 30,000 Colleges all over the country. The unevenness of institutional quality— some being old universities with a historical legacy, as compared to new institutions, or differences in provision by the Centre or state or public or private, or sharply varying levels of functionality pose challenges for customizing training to felt needs of institutions.  Besides, institutions of higher education are also differently socially embedded in India’s vast plural landscape.  It is emergent therefore that academic leaders be oriented to the critical tasks they are to perform, and made aware of the responsibilities their roles entail, as also the internal and external challenges they need to handle while on the job.  
Similarly in the school sector improving the efficiency in the educational management of academic administrators will go a long way to strengthen the effectiveness of educational institutions at the school level. The teacher education institutions, such as, DIETs, SCERTs are the important institutions of in service training of educational practitioners.  
 
Vision 
To develop educational managers who are able to coordinate the efforts of all stakeholders in order to improve effectiveness of an organization. 
 
 
 Mission 
The Mission is to set up institutions of national repute and standards, for leadership development suited to school and higher education institutions.  
Objectives 
• To evolve a systematic programme on the training needs of top functionaries and institutional heads such as Vice Chancellors, Pro-Vice Chancellors, Deans, Heads of Post Graduate Departments, and Principals and Vice Principals of Colleges 
• To provide entry-level (pre-service) orientation training with a focus on requisite functional proficiency and attitude orientation  
• To provide specialized area trainings in selected issues of critical relevance, and specially with a view to enhancing institutional quality and innovation 
• To create a pool of academic managers in school education 
• To develop training resources for academic managers of DIETs, SCERTs, other teacher education institutions 
 
Implementation Design  
 
Proposals for setting up five Centres of Academic leadership and Educational Management will be invited from the institutes of excellence engaged in leadership training and educational management and selected on competitive basis.  
 Financial Norms 
 The capital /infrastructure development cost for setting up of each Centre is envisaged to be Rs. 6.10 crore (subject to a ceiling of Rs.5.42 crore for civil works)during the entire period of the Mission. The recurring cost for each Centre is Rs. 1.40 crore per year.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter III 
 
Funding norms 
 
1.1 Funds flow & payment norms for various activities 
 
The payment norms would be suitably determined on the advice of the Project Approval Board. MHRD shall be fully responsible for releasing funds in time on the recommendation of the Project Approval Board. The Project Approval Board in its recommendations shall clearly mention the timings and amount for the release. The funds once approved shall directly be released to competent authority in organization/institutions. These institutes shall be responsible for delivery of outcomes stated against the release of funds. Fund release against the deliverable shall clearly be uploaded on the website of the Mission along with summary of activities, for scrutiny by the stakeholders at all the times. 
 
1.2 Accounting Procedures 
 
(i) Separate accounts are to be maintained by each Institute/University/Centre in regard to the grants released by the Central Government. 
 
(ii) The Accounts of the grantee organization shall be open to audit at any time by the Comptroller and Audited General of India or his nominee at his discretion. 
 
(iii) The grantee organization shall submit to the Government of India, a Statement of Accounts audited by a Chartered Accountant, stating out the expenditure incurred on the approved project and indication the utilization of the Government grant in the preceding years.  If the utilization certificate is not submitted within the prescribed period, the grantee shall arrange to refund immediately the whole amount of the grant received together with interest thereon at the prevailing borrowing rate of the  Government of India unless specially exempted by the Government. 
 
(iv) The grantee organization will be open to a review by the Government of India, Ministry of Human Resource Development by appointing a Committee or in any other manner decided by the Government as and when deemed necessary by the Government. 
 
(v) The flow of funds will be governed by the relevant provisions contained in Rule 209 to Rule 212 of GFRs, 2005, which inter-alia, prescribe the procedure for release of Grant-in-Aid; Accounts of the Grantee Institutions; Audit of Accounts of Grant-inaid by the grant sanctioning authority and C&AG and submission of UCs [Form GFR 19-A] by the grantee Institutions. 
 
It will be subjected to such other conditions as may be imposed by the government from time to time. 
 
******************************************************************** 
2 
 

2 
 



